SUMMARY
This chapter presents the evolutionary changes that have occurred in parallel, distributed, and cloud
computing over the past 30 years, driven by applications with variable workloads and large data
sets. We study both high-performance and high-throughput computing systems in parallel computers
appearing as computer clusters, service-oriented architecture, computational grids, peer-to-peer net￾works, Internet clouds, and the Internet of Things. These systems are distinguished by their hard￾ware architectures, OS platforms, processing algorithms, communication protocols, and service
models applied. We also introduce essential issues on the scalability, performance, availability,
security, and energy efficiency in distributed systems.
1.1 SCALABLE COMPUTING OVER THE INTERNET
Over the past 60 years, computing technology has undergone a series of platform and environment
changes. In this section, we assess evolutionary changes in machine architecture, operating system
platform, network connectivity, and application workload. Instead of using a centralized computer
to solve computational problems, a parallel and distributed computing system uses multiple
computers to solve large-scale problems over the Internet. Thus, distributed computing becomes
data-intensive and network-centric. This section identifies the applications of modern computer
systems that practice parallel and distributed computing. These large-scale Internet applications
have significantly enhanced the quality of life and information services in society today.
1.1.1 The Age of Internet Computing
Billions of people use the Internet every day. As a result, supercomputer sites and large data centers
must provide high-performance computing services to huge numbers of Internet users concurrently.
Because of this high demand, the Linpack Benchmark for high-performance computing (HPC)
applications is no longer optimal for measuring system performance. The emergence of computing
clouds instead demands high-throughput computing (HTC) systems built with parallel and distribu￾ted computing technologies [5,6,19,25]. We have to upgrade data centers using fast servers, storage
systems, and high-bandwidth networks. The purpose is to advance network-based computing and
web services with the emerging new technologies.
1.1.1.1 The Platform Evolution
Computer technology has gone through five generations of development, with each generation lasting
from 10 to 20 years. Successive generations are overlapped in about 10 years. For instance, from
1950 to 1970, a handful of mainframes, including the IBM 360 and CDC 6400, were built to satisfy
the demands of large businesses and government organizations. From 1960 to 1980, lower-cost mini￾computers such as the DEC PDP 11 and VAX Series became popular among small businesses and on
college campuses.
From 1970 to 1990, we saw widespread use of personal computers built with VLSI microproces￾sors. From 1980 to 2000, massive numbers of portable computers and pervasive devices appeared in
both wired and wireless applications. Since 1990, the use of both HPC and HTC systems hidden in
4 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies MODULE 1
clusters, grids, or Internet clouds has proliferated. These systems are employed by both consumers
and high-end web-scale computing and information services.
The general computing trend is to leverage shared web resources and massive amounts of data
over the Internet. Figure 1.1 illustrates the evolution of HPC and HTC systems. On the HPC side,
supercomputers (massively parallel processors or MPPs) are gradually replaced by clusters of
cooperative computers out of a desire to share computing resources. The cluster is often a collection
of homogeneous compute nodes that are physically connected in close range to one another. We will
discuss clusters, MPPs, and grid systems in more detail in Chapters 2 and 7.
On the HTC side, peer-to-peer (P2P) networks are formed for distributed file sharing and
content delivery applications. A P2P system is built over many client machines (a concept we
will discuss further in Chapter 5). Peer machines are globally distributed in nature. P2P, cloud
computing, and web service platforms are more focused on HTC applications than on HPC appli￾cations. Clustering and P2P technologies lead to the development of computational grids or data
grids.
1.1.1.2 High-Performance Computing
For many years, HPC systems emphasize the raw speed performance. The speed of HPC systems
has increased from Gflops in the early 1990s to now Pflops in 2010. This improvement was driven
mainly by the demands from scientific, engineering, and manufacturing communities. For example,
Disparate
nodes
File sharing
Distributed
control
Geographically sparse
Service-oriented
architecture (SOA)
Web 2.0 services
Internet clouds
Internet of Things
RFID and
sensors
Disparate clusters
Virtualization
Computational
and data grids
Clusters or MPPs Centralized
control
Homogeneous
nodes HPC systems
P2P network
High speed
HTC systems
FIGURE 1.1
Evolutionary trend toward parallel, distributed, and cloud computing with clusters, MPPs, P2P networks, grids,
clouds, web services, and the Internet of Things.
1.1 Scalable Computing over the Internet 5
6 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
the Top 500 most powerful computer systems in the world are measured by floating-point speed in
Linpack benchmark results. However, the number of supercomputer users is limited to less than
10% of all computer users. Today, the majority of computer users are using desktop computers or
large servers when they conduct Internet searches and market-driven computing tasks.
1.1.1.3 High-Throughput Computing
The development of market-oriented high-end computing systems is undergoing a strategic change
from an HPC paradigm to an HTC paradigm. This HTC paradigm pays more attention to high-flux
computing. The main application for high-flux computing is in Internet searches and web services
by millions or more users simultaneously. The performance goal thus shifts to measure high
throughput or the number of tasks completed per unit of time. HTC technology needs to not only
improve in terms of batch processing speed, but also address the acute problems of cost, energy
savings, security, and reliability at many data and enterprise computing centers. This book will
address both HPC and HTC systems to meet the demands of all computer users.
1.1.1.4 Three New Computing Paradigms
As Figure 1.1 illustrates, with the introduction of SOA, Web 2.0 services become available. Advances
in virtualization make it possible to see the growth of Internet clouds as a new computing paradigm.
The maturity of radio-frequency identification (RFID), Global Positioning System (GPS), and sensor
technologies has triggered the development of the Internet of Things (IoT). These new paradigms
are only briefly introduced here. We will study the details of SOA in Chapter 5; virtualization in
Chapter 3; cloud computing in Chapters 4, 6, and 9; and the IoT along with cyber-physical systems
(CPS) in Chapter 9.
When the Internet was introduced in 1969, Leonard Klienrock of UCLA declared: “As of now,
computer networks are still in their infancy, but as they grow up and become sophisticated, we will
probably see the spread of computer utilities, which like present electric and telephone utilities,
will service individual homes and offices across the country.” Many people have redefined the term
“computer” since that time. In 1984, John Gage of Sun Microsystems created the slogan, “The net￾work is the computer.” In 2008, David Patterson of UC Berkeley said, “The data center is the compu￾ter. There are dramatic differences between developing software for millions to use as a service
versus distributing software to run on their PCs.” Recently, Rajkumar Buyya of Melbourne University
simply said: “The cloud is the computer.”
This book covers clusters, MPPs, P2P networks, grids, clouds, web services, social networks,
and the IoT. In fact, the differences among clusters, grids, P2P systems, and clouds may blur in the
future. Some people view clouds as grids or clusters with modest changes through virtualization.
Others feel the changes could be major, since clouds are anticipated to process huge data sets gener￾ated by the traditional Internet, social networks, and the future IoT. In subsequent chapters, the
distinctions and dependencies among all distributed and cloud systems models will become clearer
and more transparent.
1.1.1.5 Computing Paradigm Distinctions
The high-technology community has argued for many years about the precise definitions of
centralized computing, parallel computing, distributed computing, and cloud computing. In general,
distributed computing is the opposite of centralized computing. The field of parallel computing
overlaps with distributed computing to a great extent, and cloud computing overlaps with distributed,
centralized, and parallel computing. The following list defines these terms more clearly; their architec￾tural and operational differences are discussed further in subsequent chapters.
• Centralized computing This is a computing paradigm by which all computer resources are
centralized in one physical system. All resources (processors, memory, and storage) are fully
shared and tightly coupled within one integrated OS. Many data centers and supercomputers are
centralized systems, but they are used in parallel, distributed, and cloud computing applications
[18,26].
• Parallel computing In parallel computing, all processors are either tightly coupled with
centralized shared memory or loosely coupled with distributed memory. Some authors refer to
this discipline as parallel processing [15,27]. Interprocessor communication is accomplished
through shared memory or via message passing. A computer system capable of parallel
computing is commonly known as a parallel computer [28]. Programs running in a parallel
computer are called parallel programs. The process of writing parallel programs is often
referred to as parallel programming [32].
• Distributed computing This is a field of computer science/engineering that studies distributed
systems. A distributed system [8,13,37,46] consists of multiple autonomous computers, each
having its own private memory, communicating through a computer network. Information
exchange in a distributed system is accomplished through message passing. A computer
program that runs in a distributed system is known as a distributed program. The process of
writing distributed programs is referred to as distributed programming.
• Cloud computing An Internet cloud of resources can be either a centralized or a distributed
computing system. The cloud applies parallel or distributed computing, or both. Clouds can be
built with physical or virtualized resources over large data centers that are centralized or
distributed. Some authors consider cloud computing to be a form of utility computing or service
computing [11,19].
As an alternative to the preceding terms, some in the high-tech community prefer the term con￾current computing or concurrent programming. These terms typically refer to the union of parallel
computing and distributing computing, although biased practitioners may interpret them differently.
Ubiquitous computing refers to computing with pervasive devices at any place and time using wired
or wireless communication. The Internet of Things (IoT) is a networked connection of everyday
objects including computers, sensors, humans, etc. The IoT is supported by Internet clouds to
achieve ubiquitous computing with any object at any place and time. Finally, the term Internet
computing is even broader and covers all computing paradigms over the Internet. This book covers
all the aforementioned computing paradigms, placing more emphasis on distributed and cloud com￾puting and their working systems, including the clusters, grids, P2P, and cloud systems.
1.1.1.6 Distributed System Families
Since the mid-1990s, technologies for building P2P networks and networks of clusters have been
consolidated into many national projects designed to establish wide area computing infrastructures,
known as computational grids or data grids. Recently, we have witnessed a surge in interest in
exploring Internet cloud resources for data-intensive applications. Internet clouds are the result of
moving desktop computing to service-oriented computing using server clusters and huge databases
1.1 Scalable Computing over the Internet 7
at data centers. This chapter introduces the basics of various parallel and distributed families. Grids
and clouds are disparity systems that place great emphasis on resource sharing in hardware,
software, and data sets.
Design theory, enabling technologies, and case studies of these massively distributed systems
are also covered in this book. Massively distributed systems are intended to exploit a high degree
of parallelism or concurrency among many machines. In October 2010, the highest performing
cluster machine was built in China with 86016 CPU processor cores and 3,211,264 GPU cores
in a Tianhe-1A system. The largest computational grid connects up to hundreds of server clus￾ters. A typical P2P network may involve millions of client machines working simultaneously.
Experimental cloud computing clusters have been built with thousands of processing nodes. We
devote the material in Chapters 4 through 6 to cloud computing. Case studies of HTC systems
will be examined in Chapters 4 and 9, including data centers, social networks, and virtualized
cloud platforms
In the future, both HPC and HTC systems will demand multicore or many-core processors that
can handle large numbers of computing threads per core. Both HPC and HTC systems emphasize
parallelism and distributed computing. Future HPC and HTC systems must be able to satisfy this
huge demand in computing power in terms of throughput, efficiency, scalability, and reliability. The
system efficiency is decided by speed, programming, and energy factors (i.e., throughput per watt
of energy consumed). Meeting these goals requires to yield the following design objectives:
• Efficiency measures the utilization rate of resources in an execution model by exploiting
massive parallelism in HPC. For HTC, efficiency is more closely related to job throughput, data
access, storage, and power efficiency.
• Dependability measures the reliability and self-management from the chip to the system and
application levels. The purpose is to provide high-throughput service with Quality of Service
(QoS) assurance, even under failure conditions.
• Adaptation in the programming model measures the ability to support billions of job requests
over massive data sets and virtualized cloud resources under various workload and service
models.
• Flexibility in application deployment measures the ability of distributed systems to run well in
both HPC (science and engineering) and HTC (business) applications.
1.1.2 Scalable Computing Trends and New Paradigms
Several predictable trends in technology are known to drive computing applications. In fact,
designers and programmers want to predict the technological capabilities of future systems. For
instance, Jim Gray’s paper, “Rules of Thumb in Data Engineering,” is an excellent example of how
technology affects applications and vice versa. In addition, Moore’s law indicates that processor
speed doubles every 18 months. Although Moore’s law has been proven valid over the last
30 years, it is difficult to say whether it will continue to be true in the future.
Gilder’s law indicates that network bandwidth has doubled each year in the past. Will that trend
continue in the future? The tremendous price/performance ratio of commodity hardware was driven
by the desktop, notebook, and tablet computing markets. This has also driven the adoption and use
of commodity technologies in large-scale computing. We will discuss the future of these computing
trends in more detail in subsequent chapters. For now, it’s important to understand how distributed
8 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
systems emphasize both resource distribution and concurrency or high degree of parallelism (DoP).
Let’s review the degrees of parallelism before we discuss the special requirements for distributed
computing.
1.1.2.1 Degrees of Parallelism
Fifty years ago, when hardware was bulky and expensive, most computers were designed in a
bit-serial fashion. In this scenario, bit-level parallelism (BLP) converts bit-serial processing to
word-level processing gradually. Over the years, users graduated from 4-bit microprocessors to 8-,
16-, 32-, and 64-bit CPUs. This led us to the next wave of improvement, known as instruction-level
parallelism (ILP), in which the processor executes multiple instructions simultaneously rather than
only one instruction at a time. For the past 30 years, we have practiced ILP through pipelining, super￾scalar computing, VLIW (very long instruction word) architectures, and multithreading. ILP requires
branch prediction, dynamic scheduling, speculation, and compiler support to work efficiently.
Data-level parallelism (DLP) was made popular through SIMD (single instruction, multiple
data) and vector machines using vector or array types of instructions. DLP requires even more hard￾ware support and compiler assistance to work properly. Ever since the introduction of multicore
processors and chip multiprocessors (CMPs), we have been exploring task-level parallelism (TLP).
A modern processor explores all of the aforementioned parallelism types. In fact, BLP, ILP, and
DLP are well supported by advances in hardware and compilers. However, TLP is far from being
very successful due to difficulty in programming and compilation of code for efficient execution on
multicore CMPs. As we move from parallel processing to distributed processing, we will see an
increase in computing granularity to job-level parallelism (JLP). It is fair to say that coarse-grain
parallelism is built on top of fine-grain parallelism.
1.1.2.2 Innovative Applications
Both HPC and HTC systems desire transparency in many application aspects. For example, data
access, resource allocation, process location, concurrency in execution, job replication, and failure
recovery should be made transparent to both users and system management. Table 1.1 highlights a
few key applications that have driven the development of parallel and distributed systems over the
Table 1.1 Applications of High-Performance and High-Throughput Systems
Domain Specific Applications
Science and engineering Scientific simulations, genomic analysis, etc.
Earthquake prediction, global warming, weather forecasting, etc.
Business, education, services
industry, and health care
Telecommunication, content delivery, e-commerce, etc.
Banking, stock exchanges, transaction processing, etc.
Air traffic control, electric power grids, distance education, etc.
Health care, hospital automation, telemedicine, etc.
Internet and web services,
and government applications
Internet search, data centers, decision-making systems, etc.
Traffic monitoring, worm containment, cyber security, etc.
Digital government, online tax return processing, social networking, etc.
Mission-critical applications Military command and control, intelligent systems, crisis management, etc.
1.1 Scalable Computing over the Internet 9
years. These applications spread across many important domains in science, engineering, business,
education, health care, traffic control, Internet and web services, military, and government
applications.
Almost all applications demand computing economics, web-scale data collection, system
reliability, and scalable performance. For example, distributed transaction processing is often prac￾ticed in the banking and finance industry. Transactions represent 90 percent of the existing market for
reliable banking systems. Users must deal with multiple database servers in distributed transactions.
Maintaining the consistency of replicated transaction records is crucial in real-time banking services.
Other complications include lack of software support, network saturation, and security threats in these
applications. We will study applications and software support in more detail in subsequent chapters.
1.1.2.3 The Trend toward Utility Computing
Figure 1.2 identifies major computing paradigms to facilitate the study of distributed systems and
their applications. These paradigms share some common characteristics. First, they are all ubiquitous
in daily life. Reliability and scalability are two major design objectives in these computing models.
Second, they are aimed at autonomic operations that can be self-organized to support dynamic dis￾covery. Finally, these paradigms are composable with QoS and SLAs (service-level agreements).
These paradigms and their attributes realize the computer utility vision.
Utility computing focuses on a business model in which customers receive computing resources
from a paid service provider. All grid/cloud platforms are regarded as utility service providers.
However, cloud computing offers a broader concept than utility computing. Distributed cloud
applications run on any available servers in some edge networks. Major technological challenges
include all aspects of computer science and engineering. For example, users demand new network￾efficient processors, scalable memory and storage schemes, distributed OSes, middleware for
machine virtualization, new programming models, effective resource management, and application
Technology
convergence
HTC in
business
and HPC in
scientific
applications
Computing paradigms
Attributes/
capabilities
Web services
Data centers
Utility computing
Service computing
Grid computing
P2P computing
Cloud computing
Ubiquitous: Reliable and scalable
Autonomic: Dynamic and discovery
Composable: QoS, SLA, etc.
FIGURE 1.2
The vision of computer utilities in modern distributed computing systems.
(Modified from presentation slide by Raj Buyya, 2010)
10 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
program development. These hardware and software supports are necessary to build distributed
systems that explore massive parallelism at all processing levels.
1.1.2.4 The Hype Cycle of New Technologies
Any new and emerging computing and information technology may go through a hype cycle, as
illustrated in Figure 1.3. This cycle shows the expectations for the technology at five different
stages. The expectations rise sharply from the trigger period to a high peak of inflated expectations.
Through a short period of disillusionment, the expectation may drop to a valley and then increase
steadily over a long enlightenment period to a plateau of productivity. The number of years for an
emerging technology to reach a certain stage is marked by special symbols. The hollow circles
indicate technologies that will reach mainstream adoption in two years. The gray circles represent
technologies that will reach mainstream adoption in two to five years. The solid circles represent
those that require five to 10 years to reach mainstream adoption, and the triangles denote those that
require more than 10 years. The crossed circles represent technologies that will become obsolete
before they reach the plateau.
The hype cycle in Figure 1.3 shows the technology status as of August 2010. For example, at
that time consumer-generated media was at the disillusionment stage, and it was predicted to take
less than two years to reach its plateau of adoption. Internet micropayment systems were forecast to
take two to five years to move from the enlightenment stage to maturity. It was believed that 3D
printing would take five to 10 years to move from the rising expectation stage to mainstream adop￾tion, and mesh network sensors were expected to take more than 10 years to move from the inflated
expectation stage to a plateau of mainstream adoption.
Also as shown in Figure 1.3, the cloud technology had just crossed the peak of the expectation
stage in 2010, and it was expected to take two to five more years to reach the productivity stage.
However, broadband over power line technology was expected to become obsolete before leaving
the valley of disillusionment stage in 2010. Many additional technologies (denoted by dark circles
in Figure 1.3) were at their peak expectation stage in August 2010, and they were expected to take
five to 10 years to reach their plateau of success. Once a technology begins to climb the slope of
enlightenment, it may reach the productivity plateau within two to five years. Among these promis￾ing technologies are the clouds, biometric authentication, interactive TV, speech recognition, predic￾tive analytics, and media tablets.
1.1.3 The Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems
In this section, we will discuss two Internet development trends: the Internet of Things [48] and
cyber-physical systems. These evolutionary trends emphasize the extension of the Internet to every￾day objects. We will only cover the basics of these concepts here; we will discuss them in more
detail in Chapter 9.
1.1.3.1 The Internet of Things
The traditional Internet connects machines to machines or web pages to web pages. The concept of
the IoT was introduced in 1999 at MIT [40]. The IoT refers to the networked interconnection of
everyday objects, tools, devices, or computers. One can view the IoT as a wireless network of sen￾sors that interconnect all things in our daily life. These things can be large or small and they vary
1.1 Scalable Computing over the Internet 11
12Wireless power Media tablet
Augmented reality
Private cloud computing
Internet TV
Speech-to-speech translation
3D printing
Social analytics
Mobile robots
Video search
Autonomous vehicles
Extreme transaction processing
Tangible user interfaces
Terahertz waves
Computer-brain interface
Context delivery architecture
Human augmentation
Technology
trigger
Years to mainstream adoption:
Expectations
Peak of
inflated
expectations
Trough of
disillusionment
Time
Slope of enlightenment Plateau of productivity
Virtual assistants
Public virtual worlds
Consumer-generated media
Idea management
As of august 2010
Mobile application stores
Biometric authentication methods
Internet micropayment systems
Interactive TV Predictive analytics
Speech recognition
Pen-centric tablet PCs
Electronic paper
3D flat-panel TVs and displays
4G standard
Activity streams
Cloud computing
Cloud/web platforms
Gesture recognition
Mesh networks: sensor
Microblogging
E-Book readers
Video telepresence
Location-aware applications
Less than 2 years 2 to 5 years 5 to 10 years More than 10 years Obsolete before
plateau
Broadband over power lines
FIGURE 1.3
Hype cycle for Emerging Technologies, 2010.
Hype Cycle Disclaimer
The Hype Cycle is copyrighted 2010 by Gartner, Inc. and its affiliates and is reused with permission. Hype Cycles are graphical representations of the relative maturity of
technologies, IT methodologies and management disciplines. They are intended solely as a research tool, and not as a specific guide to action. Gartner disclaims all warranties,
express or implied, with respect to this research, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.
This Hype Cycle graphic was published by Gartner, Inc. as part of a larger research note and should be evaluated in the context of the entire report. The Gartner report is
available at http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1447613.
(Source: Gartner Press Release “Gartner’s 2010 Hype Cycle Special Report Evaluates Maturity of 1,800 Technologies” 7 October 2010.)
with respect to time and place. The idea is to tag every object using RFID or a related sensor or
electronic technology such as GPS.
With the introduction of the IPv6 protocol, 2128 IP addresses are available to distinguish all the
objects on Earth, including all computers and pervasive devices. The IoT researchers have estimated
that every human being will be surrounded by 1,000 to 5,000 objects. The IoT needs to be designed
to track 100 trillion static or moving objects simultaneously. The IoT demands universal addressa￾bility of all of the objects or things. To reduce the complexity of identification, search, and storage,
one can set the threshold to filter out fine-grain objects. The IoT obviously extends the Internet and
is more heavily developed in Asia and European countries.
In the IoT era, all objects and devices are instrumented, interconnected, and interacted with each
other intelligently. This communication can be made between people and things or among the things
themselves. Three communication patterns co-exist: namely H2H (human-to-human), H2T (human-to￾thing), and T2T (thing-to-thing). Here things include machines such as PCs and mobile phones. The idea
here is to connect things (including human and machine objects) at any time and any place intelligently
with low cost. Any place connections include at the PC, indoor (away from PC), outdoors, and on the
move. Any time connections include daytime, night, outdoors and indoors, and on the move as well.
The dynamic connections will grow exponentially into a new dynamic network of networks,
called the Internet of Things (IoT). The IoT is still in its infancy stage of development. Many proto￾type IoTs with restricted areas of coverage are under experimentation at the time of this writing.
Cloud computing researchers expect to use the cloud and future Internet technologies to support
fast, efficient, and intelligent interactions among humans, machines, and any objects on Earth.
A smart Earth should have intelligent cities, clean water, efficient power, convenient transportation,
good food supplies, responsible banks, fast telecommunications, green IT, better schools, good
health care, abundant resources, and so on. This dream living environment may take some time to
reach fruition at different parts of the world.
1.1.3.2 Cyber-Physical Systems
A cyber-physical system (CPS) is the result of interaction between computational processes and the
physical world. A CPS integrates “cyber” (heterogeneous, asynchronous) with “physical” (concur￾rent and information-dense) objects. A CPS merges the “3C” technologies of computation, commu￾nication, and control into an intelligent closed feedback system between the physical world and the
information world, a concept which is actively explored in the United States. The IoT emphasizes
various networking connections among physical objects, while the CPS emphasizes exploration of
virtual reality (VR) applications in the physical world. We may transform how we interact with the
physical world just like the Internet transformed how we interact with the virtual world. We will
study IoT, CPS, and their relationship to cloud computing in Chapter 9.
1.2 TECHNOLOGIES FOR NETWORK-BASED SYSTEMS
With the concept of scalable computing under our belt, it’s time to explore hardware, software, and
network technologies for distributed computing system design and applications. In particular, we
will focus on viable approaches to building distributed operating systems for handling massive par￾allelism in a distributed environment.
1.2 Technologies for Network-based Systems 13
1.2.1 Multicore CPUs and Multithreading Technologies
Consider the growth of component and network technologies over the past 30 years. They are
crucial to the development of HPC and HTC systems. In Figure 1.4, processor speed is measured
in millions of instructions per second (MIPS) and network bandwidth is measured in megabits per
second (Mbps) or gigabits per second (Gbps). The unit GE refers to 1 Gbps Ethernet bandwidth.
1.2.1.1 Advances in CPU Processors
Today, advanced CPUs or microprocessor chips assume a multicore architecture with dual, quad,
six, or more processing cores. These processors exploit parallelism at ILP and TLP levels. Processor
speed growth is plotted in the upper curve in Figure 1.4 across generations of microprocessors or
CMPs. We see growth from 1 MIPS for the VAX 780 in 1978 to 1,800 MIPS for the Intel Pentium
4 in 2002, up to a 22,000 MIPS peak for the Sun Niagara 2 in 2008. As the figure shows, Moore’s
law has proven to be pretty accurate in this case. The clock rate for these processors increased from
10 MHz for the Intel 286 to 4 GHz for the Pentium 4 in 30 years.
However, the clock rate reached its limit on CMOS-based chips due to power limitations. At the
time of this writing, very few CPU chips run with a clock rate exceeding 5 GHz. In other words,
clock rate will not continue to improve unless chip technology matures. This limitation is attributed
primarily to excessive heat generation with high frequency or high voltages. The ILP is highly
exploited in modern CPU processors. ILP mechanisms include multiple-issue superscalar architecture,
dynamic branch prediction, and speculative execution, among others. These ILP techniques demand
hardware and compiler support. In addition, DLP and TLP are highly explored in graphics processing
units (GPUs) that adopt a many-core architecture with hundreds to thousands of simple cores.
1000000
100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
0.1
1000000
Intel Core i7 990x
Intel Core 2 QX9770
VAX 11/780
Intel 286
Intel Pentium
Intel Pentium Pro
Intel Pentium III
Intel Pentium 4
AMD athlon FX-60
10 GE
Gigabit ethernet
Fast ethernet
Motorola 68040
Motorola 68030
Motorola 68020
100000
10000
1000
100
10
2011 2008 2005 2002 1999 1996 1993 1990 1987 1984 1981 1978
Processor speed
Network bandwidth
Ethernet
40/100 GE
FIGURE 1.4
Improvement in processor and network technologies over 33 years.
(Courtesy of Xiaosong Lou and Lizhong Chen of University of Southern California, 2011)
14 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies CPU speed (MIPS)
Network bandwidth (Mbps)
Both multi-core CPU and many-core GPU processors can handle multiple instruction threads at
different magnitudes today. Figure 1.5 shows the architecture of a typical multicore processor.
Each core is essentially a processor with its own private cache (L1 cache). Multiple cores are
housed in the same chip with an L2 cache that is shared by all cores. In the future, multiple CMPs
could be built on the same CPU chip with even the L3 cache on the chip. Multicore and multi￾threaded CPUs are equipped with many high-end processors, including the Intel i7, Xeon, AMD
Opteron, Sun Niagara, IBM Power 6, and X cell processors. Each core could be also multithreaded.
For example, the Niagara II is built with eight cores with eight threads handled by each core. This
implies that the maximum ILP and TLP that can be exploited in Niagara is 64 (8 × 8 = 64). In
2011, the Intel Core i7 990x has reported 159,000 MIPS execution rate as shown in the upper￾most square in Figure 1.4.
1.2.1.2 Multicore CPU and Many-Core GPU Architectures
Multicore CPUs may increase from the tens of cores to hundreds or more in the future. But the
CPU has reached its limit in terms of exploiting massive DLP due to the aforementioned memory
wall problem. This has triggered the development of many-core GPUs with hundreds or more thin
cores. Both IA-32 and IA-64 instruction set architectures are built into commercial CPUs. Now,
x-86 processors have been extended to serve HPC and HTC systems in some high-end server
processors.
Many RISC processors have been replaced with multicore x-86 processors and many-core GPUs
in the Top 500 systems. This trend indicates that x-86 upgrades will dominate in data centers and
supercomputers. The GPU also has been applied in large clusters to build supercomputers in MPPs.
In the future, the processor industry is also keen to develop asymmetric or heterogeneous chip mul￾tiprocessors that can house both fat CPU cores and thin GPU cores on the same chip.
1.2.1.3 Multithreading Technology
Consider in Figure 1.6 the dispatch of five independent threads of instructions to four pipelined data
paths (functional units) in each of the following five processor categories, from left to right: a
Multicore processor
Core 1
L1 cache
Core 2 ... ...
... ... L1 cache
Core n
L1 cache
L2 cache
L3 cache/DRAM
FIGURE 1.5
Schematic of a modern multicore CPU chip using a hierarchy of caches, where L1 cache is private to each
core, on-chip L2 cache is shared and L3 cache or DRAM Is off the chip.
1.2 Technologies for Network-based Systems 15
four-issue superscalar processor, a fine-grain multithreaded processor, a coarse-grain multi￾threaded processor, a two-core CMP, and a simultaneous multithreaded (SMT) processor. The
superscalar processor is single-threaded with four functional units. Each of the three multithreaded
processors is four-way multithreaded over four functional data paths. In the dual-core processor,
assume two processing cores, each a single-threaded two-way superscalar processor.
Instructions from different threads are distinguished by specific shading patterns for instruc￾tions from five independent threads. Typical instruction scheduling patterns are shown here. Only
instructions from the same thread are executed in a superscalar processor. Fine-grain multithread￾ing switches the execution of instructions from different threads per cycle. Course-grain multi￾threading executes many instructions from the same thread for quite a few cycles before
switching to another thread. The multicore CMP executes instructions from different threads com￾pletely. The SMT allows simultaneous scheduling of instructions from different threads in the
same cycle.
These execution patterns closely mimic an ordinary program. The blank squares correspond to
no available instructions for an instruction data path at a particular processor cycle. More blank
cells imply lower scheduling efficiency. The maximum ILP or maximum TLP is difficult to achieve
at each processor cycle. The point here is to demonstrate your understanding of typical instruction
scheduling patterns in these five different micro-architectures in modern processors.
Thread 1
Thread 2
4-issue
superscalar
processor
Time
(cycle)
Thread 3
Thread 4
Thread 5
Idle slot (blank)
Fine-grain
multithreaded
processor
Coarse-grain
multithreaded
processor
Dual-core
(2-processor
CMP)
Simultaneous
multithreaded
(SMT) processor
FIGURE 1.6
Five micro-architectures in modern CPU processors, that exploit ILP and TLP supported by multicore and
multithreading technologies.
16 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
1.2.2 GPU Computing to Exascale and Beyond
A GPU is a graphics coprocessor or accelerator mounted on a computer’s graphics card or video
card. A GPU offloads the CPU from tedious graphics tasks in video editing applications. The
world’s first GPU, the GeForce 256, was marketed by NVIDIA in 1999. These GPU chips can pro￾cess a minimum of 10 million polygons per second, and are used in nearly every computer on the
market today. Some GPU features were also integrated into certain CPUs. Traditional CPUs are
structured with only a few cores. For example, the Xeon X5670 CPU has six cores. However, a
modern GPU chip can be built with hundreds of processing cores.
Unlike CPUs, GPUs have a throughput architecture that exploits massive parallelism by
executing many concurrent threads slowly, instead of executing a single long thread in a conven￾tional microprocessor very quickly. Lately, parallel GPUs or GPU clusters have been garnering a
lot of attention against the use of CPUs with limited parallelism. General-purpose computing on
GPUs, known as GPGPUs, have appeared in the HPC field. NVIDIA’s CUDA model was for
HPC using GPGPUs. Chapter 2 will discuss GPU clusters for massively parallel computing in
more detail [15,32].
1.2.2.1 How GPUs Work
Early GPUs functioned as coprocessors attached to the CPU. Today, the NVIDIA GPU has been
upgraded to 128 cores on a single chip. Furthermore, each core on a GPU can handle eight threads
of instructions. This translates to having up to 1,024 threads executed concurrently on a single
GPU. This is true massive parallelism, compared to only a few threads that can be handled by a
conventional CPU. The CPU is optimized for latency caches, while the GPU is optimized to deliver
much higher throughput with explicit management of on-chip memory.
Modern GPUs are not restricted to accelerated graphics or video coding. They are used in HPC
systems to power supercomputers with massive parallelism at multicore and multithreading levels.
GPUs are designed to handle large numbers of floating-point operations in parallel. In a way, the
GPU offloads the CPU from all data-intensive calculations, not just those that are related to video
processing. Conventional GPUs are widely used in mobile phones, game consoles, embedded sys￾tems, PCs, and servers. The NVIDIA CUDA Tesla or Fermi is used in GPU clusters or in HPC sys￾tems for parallel processing of massive floating-pointing data.
1.2.2.2 GPU Programming Model
Figure 1.7 shows the interaction between a CPU and GPU in performing parallel execution of
floating-point operations concurrently. The CPU is the conventional multicore processor with
limited parallelism to exploit. The GPU has a many-core architecture that has hundreds of
simple processing cores organized as multiprocessors. Each core can have one or more
threads. Essentially, the CPU’s floating-point kernel computation role is largely offloaded to
the many-core GPU. The CPU instructs the GPU to perform massive data processing. The
bandwidth must be matched between the on-board main memory and the on-chip GPU memory.
This process is carried out in NVIDIA’s CUDA programming using the GeForce 8800 or Tesla
and Fermi GPUs. We will study the use of CUDA GPUs in large-scale cluster computing in
Chapter 2.
1.2 Technologies for Network-based Systems 17
Example 1.1 The NVIDIA Fermi GPU Chip with 512 CUDA Cores
In November 2010, three of the five fastest supercomputers in the world (the Tianhe-1a, Nebulae, and
Tsubame) used large numbers of GPU chips to accelerate floating-point computations. Figure 1.8 shows
the architecture of the Fermi GPU, a next-generation GPU from NVIDIA. This is a streaming multiprocessor
(SM) module. Multiple SMs can be built on a single GPU chip. The Fermi chip has 16 SMs implemented
with 3 billion transistors. Each SM comprises up to 512 streaming processors (SPs), known as CUDA
cores. The Tesla GPUs used in the Tianhe-1a have a similar architecture, with 448 CUDA cores.
The Fermi GPU is a newer generation of GPU, first appearing in 2011. The Tesla or Fermi GPU can be
used in desktop workstations to accelerate floating-point calculations or for building large-scale data cen￾ters. The architecture shown is based on a 2009 white paper by NVIDIA [36]. There are 32 CUDA cores
per SM. Only one SM is shown in Figure 1.8. Each CUDA core has a simple pipelined integer ALU and an
FPU that can be used in parallel. Each SM has 16 load/store units allowing source and destination
addresses to be calculated for 16 threads per clock. There are four special function units (SFUs) for
executing transcendental instructions.
All functional units and CUDA cores are interconnected by an NoC (network on chip) to a large
number of SRAM banks (L2 caches). Each SM has a 64 KB L1 cache. The 768 KB unified L2 cache is
shared by all SMs and serves all load, store, and texture operations. Memory controllers are used to con￾nect to 6 GB of off-chip DRAMs. The SM schedules threads in groups of 32 parallel threads called warps.
In total, 256/512 FMA (fused multiply and add) operations can be done in parallel to produce 32/64-bit
floating-point results. The 512 CUDA cores in an SM can work in parallel to deliver up to 515 Gflops of
double-precision results, if fully utilized. With 16 SMs, a single GPU has a peak speed of 82.4 Tflops. Only
12 Fermi GPUs have the potential to reach the Pflops performance.
In the future, thousand-core GPUs may appear in Exascale (Eflops or 1018 flops) systems. This
reflects a trend toward building future MPPs with hybrid architectures of both types of processing
chips. In a DARPA report published in September 2008, four challenges are identified for exascale
computing: (1) energy and power, (2) memory and storage, (3) concurrency and locality, and
(4) system resiliency. Here, we see the progress of GPUs along with CPU advances in power
GPU
... ...
Device memory
Main
memory
CPU P1 P2 Pn
Multiprocessor N
P1 P2 Pn
Multiprocessor 1
...
FIGURE 1.7
The use of a GPU along with a CPU for massively parallel execution in hundreds or thousands of processing
cores.
(Courtesy of B. He, et al., PACT’08 [23] )
18 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
efficiency, performance, and programmability [16]. In Chapter 2, we will discuss the use of GPUs
to build large clusters.
1.2.2.3 Power Efficiency of the GPU
Bill Dally of Stanford University considers power and massive parallelism as the major benefits of
GPUs over CPUs for the future. By extrapolating current technology and computer architecture, it
was estimated that 60 Gflops/watt per core is needed to run an exaflops system (see Figure 1.10).
Power constrains what we can put in a CPU or GPU chip. Dally has estimated that the CPU chip
consumes about 2 nJ/instruction, while the GPU chip requires 200 pJ/instruction, which is 1/10 less
than that of the CPU. The CPU is optimized for latency in caches and memory, while the GPU is
optimized for throughput with explicit management of on-chip memory.
Figure 1.9 compares the CPU and GPU in their performance/power ratio measured in Gflops/
watt per core. In 2010, the GPU had a value of 5 Gflops/watt at the core level, compared with less
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Instruction cache
Warp scheduler
Dispatch unit
Register file (32,768 × 32-bit)
LD/ST
LD/ST SFU LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
LD/ST
Interconnect network
Dispatch port
Operand collector
FP unit
Result queue
INT unit
64 KB shared memory/L1 cache
CUDA core
Uniform cache
Warp scheduler
Dispatch unit
SFU
SFU
SFU
FIGURE 1.8
NVIDIA Fermi GPU built with 16 streaming multiprocessors (SMs) of 32 CUDA cores each; only one SM Is
shown. More details can be found also in [49].
(Courtesy of NVIDIA, 2009 [36] 2011)
1.2 Technologies for Network-based Systems 19
than 1 Gflop/watt per CPU core. This may limit the scaling of future supercomputers. However, the
GPUs may close the gap with the CPUs. Data movement dominates power consumption. One needs
to optimize the storage hierarchy and tailor the memory to the applications. We need to promote
self-aware OS and runtime support and build locality-aware compilers and auto-tuners for GPU￾based MPPs. This implies that both power and software are the real challenges in future parallel
and distributed computing systems.
1.2.3 Memory, Storage, and Wide-Area Networking
1.2.3.1 Memory Technology
The upper curve in Figure 1.10 plots the growth of DRAM chip capacity from 16 KB in 1976 to 64 GB
in 2011. This shows that memory chips have experienced a 4x increase in capacity every three years.
Memory access time did not improve much in the past. In fact, the memory wall problem is getting
worse as the processor gets faster. For hard drives, capacity increased from 260 MB in 1981 to 250 GB
in 2004. The Seagate Barracuda XT hard drive reached 3 TB in 2011. This represents an approximately
10x increase in capacity every eight years. The capacity increase of disk arrays will be even greater in
the years to come. Faster processor speed and larger memory capacity result in a wider gap between
processors and memory. The memory wall may become even worse a problem limiting the CPU perfor￾mance in the future.
1.2.3.2 Disks and Storage Technology
Beyond 2011, disks or disk arrays have exceeded 3 TB in capacity. The lower curve in Figure 1.10
shows the disk storage growth in 7 orders of magnitude in 33 years. The rapid growth of flash
memory and solid-state drives (SSDs) also impacts the future of HPC and HTC systems. The mor￾tality rate of SSD is not bad at all. A typical SSD can handle 300,000 to 1 million write cycles per
100
10
1
0.1
2010 2013
GPU – 5 Gflops/W
2016
GPU
CPU
EF
FIGURE 1.9
The GPU performance (middle line, measured 5 Gflops/W/core in 2011), compared with the lower CPU
performance (lower line measured 0.8 Gflops/W/core in 2011) and the estimated 60 Gflops/W/core
performance in 2011 for the Exascale (EF in upper curve) in the future.
(Courtesy of Bill Dally [15])
20 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies Gflops/W (core)
block. So the SSD can last for several years, even under conditions of heavy write usage. Flash and
SSD will demonstrate impressive speedups in many applications.
Eventually, power consumption, cooling, and packaging will limit large system development.
Power increases linearly with respect to clock frequency and quadratic ally with respect to voltage
applied on chips. Clock rate cannot be increased indefinitely. Lowered voltage supplies are very
much in demand. Jim Gray once said in an invited talk at the University of Southern California,
“Tape units are dead, disks are tape units, flashes are disks, and memory are caches now.” This
clearly paints the future for disk and storage technology. In 2011, the SSDs are still too expensive
to replace stable disk arrays in the storage market.
1.2.3.3 System-Area Interconnects
The nodes in small clusters are mostly interconnected by an Ethernet switch or a local area network
(LAN). As Figure 1.11 shows, a LAN typically is used to connect client hosts to big servers.
A storage area network (SAN) connects servers to network storage such as disk arrays. Network
attached storage (NAS) connects client hosts directly to the disk arrays. All three types of networks
often appear in a large cluster built with commercial network components. If no large distributed
storage is shared, a small cluster could be built with a multiport Gigabit Ethernet switch plus copper
cables to link the end machines. All three types of networks are commercially available.
100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
0.01
0.1
1000000
64KB
Seagate
Barracuda XT
Hitachi GST
WDC WD1200JB
Maxtor
DiamondMax 2160
Seagate ST43400N
Seagate ST-506
1MB
16MB
64MB
256MB
1GB
16GB
64GB
16
256KB
Lomega
100000
10000
100
1000
10
0.001
2011 2008 2005 2002 1999 1996 1993 1990 1987 1984 1981 1978
Memory chip
Disk capacity
0.1
1
0.01
FIGURE 1.10
Improvement in memory and disk technologies over 33 years. The Seagate Barracuda XT disk has a capacity
of 3 TB in 2011.
(Courtesy of Xiaosong Lou and Lizhong Chen of University of Southern California, 2011)
1.2 Technologies for Network-based Systems 21
Memory chip (Mbit)
Disk capacity (GB)
1.2.3.4 Wide-Area Networking
The lower curve in Figure 1.10 plots the rapid growth of Ethernet bandwidth from 10 Mbps in
1979 to 1 Gbps in 1999, and 40 ~ 100 GE in 2011. It has been speculated that 1 Tbps network
links will become available by 2013. According to Berman, Fox, and Hey [6], network links with
1,000, 1,000, 100, 10, and 1 Gbps bandwidths were reported, respectively, for international,
national, organization, optical desktop, and copper desktop connections in 2006.
An increase factor of two per year on network performance was reported, which is faster than
Moore’s law on CPU speed doubling every 18 months. The implication is that more computers will
be used concurrently in the future. High-bandwidth networking increases the capability of building
massively distributed systems. The IDC 2010 report predicted that both InfiniBand and Ethernet
will be the two major interconnect choices in the HPC arena. Most data centers are using Gigabit
Ethernet as the interconnect in their server clusters.
1.2.4 Virtual Machines and Virtualization Middleware
A conventional computer has a single OS image. This offers a rigid architecture that tightly couples
application software to a specific hardware platform. Some software running well on one machine
may not be executable on another platform with a different instruction set under a fixed OS. Virtual
machines (VMs) offer novel solutions to underutilized resources, application inflexibility, software
manageability, and security concerns in existing physical machines.
Today, to build large clusters, grids, and clouds, we need to access large amounts of computing,
storage, and networking resources in a virtualized manner. We need to aggregate those resources,
and hopefully, offer a single system image. In particular, a cloud of provisioned resources must rely
on virtualization of processors, memory, and I/O facilities dynamically. We will cover virtualization
in Chapter 3. However, the basic concepts of virtualized resources, such as VMs, virtual storage,
and virtual networking and their virtualization software or middleware, need to be introduced first.
Figure 1.12 illustrates the architectures of three VM configurations.
Client hosts
(PC/WS)
NAS
SAN
LAN
Servers
(large machines)
Network storage
(disk arrays)
FIGURE 1.11
Three interconnection networks for connecting servers, client hosts, and storage devices; the LAN connects
client hosts and servers, the SAN connects servers with disk arrays, and the NAS connects clients with large
storage systems in the network environment.
22 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
1.2.4.1 Virtual Machines
In Figure 1.12, the host machine is equipped with the physical hardware, as shown at the bottom of
the figure. An example is an x-86 architecture desktop running its installed Windows OS, as shown
in part (a) of the figure. The VM can be provisioned for any hardware system. The VM is built
with virtual resources managed by a guest OS to run a specific application. Between the VMs and
the host platform, one needs to deploy a middleware layer called a virtual machine monitor (VMM).
Figure 1.12(b) shows a native VM installed with the use of a VMM called a hypervisor in privi￾leged mode. For example, the hardware has x-86 architecture running the Windows system.
The guest OS could be a Linux system and the hypervisor is the XEN system developed at
Cambridge University. This hypervisor approach is also called bare-metal VM, because the hypervi￾sor handles the bare hardware (CPU, memory, and I/O) directly. Another architecture is the host VM
shown in Figure 1.12(c). Here the VMM runs in nonprivileged mode. The host OS need not be modi￾fied. The VM can also be implemented with a dual mode, as shown in Figure 1.12(d). Part of the
VMM runs at the user level and another part runs at the supervisor level. In this case, the host OS
may have to be modified to some extent. Multiple VMs can be ported to a given hardware system to
support the virtualization process. The VM approach offers hardware independence of the OS and
applications. The user application running on its dedicated OS could be bundled together as a virtual
appliance that can be ported to any hardware platform. The VM could run on an OS different from
that of the host computer.
1.2.4.2 VM Primitive Operations
The VMM provides the VM abstraction to the guest OS. With full virtualization, the VMM exports
a VM abstraction identical to the physical machine so that a standard OS such as Windows 2000 or
Linux can run just as it would on the physical hardware. Low-level VMM operations are indicated
by Mendel Rosenblum [41] and illustrated in Figure 1.13.
Application
Operating system
(OS)
Hardware
(b) Native VM
Guest apps
Guest OS
Hardware
VMM
(hypervisor)
Hardware
Host OS
(c) Hosted VM
Guest apps
VMM
(d) Dual-mode VM
Host
OS
Guest apps
Guest OS
VMM
Hardware
VMM
Nonprivileged
mode in user
space
Privileged
mode in
system
space
(a) Physical machine
FIGURE 1.12
Three VM architectures in (b), (c), and (d), compared with the traditional physical machine shown in (a).
(Courtesy of M. Abde-Majeed and S. Kulkarni, 2009 USC)
1.2 Technologies for Network-based Systems 23
• First, the VMs can be multiplexed between hardware machines, as shown in Figure 1.13(a).
• Second, a VM can be suspended and stored in stable storage, as shown in Figure 1.13(b).
• Third, a suspended VM can be resumed or provisioned to a new hardware platform, as shown in
Figure 1.13(c).
• Finally, a VM can be migrated from one hardware platform to another, as shown in Figure 1.13(d).
These VM operations enable a VM to be provisioned to any available hardware platform. They
also enable flexibility in porting distributed application executions. Furthermore, the VM approach
will significantly enhance the utilization of server resources. Multiple server functions can be
consolidated on the same hardware platform to achieve higher system efficiency. This will eliminate
server sprawl via deployment of systems as VMs, which move transparency to the shared hardware.
With this approach, VMware claimed that server utilization could be increased from its current
5–15 percent to 60–80 percent.
1.2.4.3 Virtual Infrastructures
Physical resources for compute, storage, and networking at the bottom of Figure 1.14 are mapped to
the needy applications embedded in various VMs at the top. Hardware and software are then sepa￾rated. Virtual infrastructure is what connects resources to distributed applications. It is a dynamic
mapping of system resources to specific applications. The result is decreased costs and increased
efficiency and responsiveness. Virtualization for server consolidation and containment is a good
example of this. We will discuss VMs and virtualization support in Chapter 3. Virtualization support
for clusters, clouds, and grids is covered in Chapters 3, 4, and 7, respectively.
Hardware Hardware Hardware
Hardware Hardware
Hardware
Hardware
Storage
(c) Provision (resume)
(a) Multiplexing
Storage Storage
(d) Life migration
App App
App
App App App
App
App
OS OS OS
Storage
(b) Suspension (storage)
App
OS
OS OS OS
OS OS
VMM VMM VMM
VMM
VMM VMM
VMM
VMM
Hardware
FIGURE 1.13
VM multiplexing, suspension, provision, and migration in a distributed computing environment.
(Courtesy of M. Rosenblum, Keynote address, ACM ASPLOS 2006 [41] )
24 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
1.2.5 Data Center Virtualization for Cloud Computing
In this section, we discuss basic architecture and design considerations of data centers. Cloud architecture
is built with commodity hardware and network devices. Almost all cloud platforms choose the popular
x86 processors. Low-cost terabyte disks and Gigabit Ethernet are used to build data centers. Data center
design emphasizes the performance/price ratio over speed performance alone. In other words, storage
and energy efficiency are more important than shear speed performance. Figure 1.13 shows the server
growth and cost breakdown of data centers over the past 15 years. Worldwide, about 43 million servers
are in use as of 2010. The cost of utilities exceeds the cost of hardware after three years.
1.2.5.1 Data Center Growth and Cost Breakdown
A large data center may be built with thousands of servers. Smaller data centers are typically built
with hundreds of servers. The cost to build and maintain data center servers has increased over the
years. According to a 2009 IDC report (see Figure 1.14), typically only 30 percent of data center
costs goes toward purchasing IT equipment (such as servers and disks), 33 percent is attributed to
the chiller, 18 percent to the uninterruptible power supply (UPS), 9 percent to computer room air
conditioning (CRAC), and the remaining 7 percent to power distribution, lighting, and transformer
costs. Thus, about 60 percent of the cost to run a data center is allocated to management and main￾tenance. The server purchase cost did not increase much with time. The cost of electricity and cool￾ing did increase from 5 percent to 14 percent in 15 years.
1.2.5.2 Low-Cost Design Philosophy
High-end switches or routers may be too cost-prohibitive for building data centers. Thus, using
high-bandwidth networks may not fit the economics of cloud computing. Given a fixed budget,
80
$300
Millions installed servers Customer spending ($B)
$250
$200
$150
$100
$50
$0
’96 ’97 ’98 ’99 ’00 ’01 ’02 ’03 ’04 ’05 ’06 ’07 ’08 ’09 ’10 ’11 ’12 ’13
60
40
20
0
Server spending
Management cost
Power & cooling expense
Physical server installed base (Millions)
Logical server installed base (Millions)
Virtualization
management
gap
FIGURE 1.14
Growth and cost breakdown of data centers over the years.
(Source: IDC Report, 2009)
1.2 Technologies for Network-based Systems 25
26 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
commodity switches and networks are more desirable in data centers. Similarly, using commodity
x86 servers is more desired over expensive mainframes. The software layer handles network traffic
balancing, fault tolerance, and expandability. Currently, nearly all cloud computing data centers use
Ethernet as their fundamental network technology.
1.2.5.3 Convergence of Technologies
Essentially, cloud computing is enabled by the convergence of technologies in four areas: (1) hard￾ware virtualization and multi-core chips, (2) utility and grid computing, (3) SOA, Web 2.0, and WS
mashups, and (4) atonomic computing and data center automation. Hardware virtualization and mul￾ticore chips enable the existence of dynamic configurations in the cloud. Utility and grid computing
technologies lay the necessary foundation for computing clouds. Recent advances in SOA, Web
2.0, and mashups of platforms are pushing the cloud another step forward. Finally, achievements in
autonomic computing and automated data center operations contribute to the rise of cloud
computing.
Jim Gray once posted the following question: “Science faces a data deluge. How to manage and
analyze information?” This implies that science and our society face the same challenge of data
deluge. Data comes from sensors, lab experiments, simulations, individual archives, and the web in
all scales and formats. Preservation, movement, and access of massive data sets require generic
tools supporting high-performance, scalable file systems, databases, algorithms, workflows, and
visualization. With science becoming data-centric, a new paradigm of scientific discovery is becom￾ing based on data-intensive technologies.
On January 11, 2007, the Computer Science and Telecommunication Board (CSTB) recom￾mended fostering tools for data capture, data creation, and data analysis. A cycle of interaction
exists among four technical areas. First, cloud technology is driven by a surge of interest in data
deluge. Also, cloud computing impacts e-science greatly, which explores multicore and parallel
computing technologies. These two hot areas enable the buildup of data deluge. To support data￾intensive computing, one needs to address workflows, databases, algorithms, and virtualization
issues.
By linking computer science and technologies with scientists, a spectrum of e-science or
e-research applications in biology, chemistry, physics, the social sciences, and the humanities has
generated new insights from interdisciplinary activities. Cloud computing is a transformative
approach as it promises much more than a data center model. It fundamentally changes how we
interact with information. The cloud provides services on demand at the infrastructure, platform, or
software level. At the platform level, MapReduce offers a new programming model that transpar￾ently handles data parallelism with natural fault tolerance capability. We will discuss MapReduce in
more detail in Chapter 6.
Iterative MapReduce extends MapReduce to support a broader range of data mining algorithms
commonly used in scientific applications. The cloud runs on an extremely large cluster of commod￾ity computers. Internal to each cluster node, multithreading is practiced with a large number of
cores in many-core GPU clusters. Data-intensive science, cloud computing, and multicore comput￾ing are converging and revolutionizing the next generation of computing in architectural design and
programming challenges. They enable the pipeline: Data becomes information and knowledge, and
in turn becomes machine wisdom as desired in SOA.
1.3 SYSTEM MODELS FOR DISTRIBUTED AND CLOUD COMPUTING
Distributed and cloud computing systems are built over a large number of autonomous computer
nodes. These node machines are interconnected by SANs, LANs, or WANs in a hierarchical man￾ner. With today’s networking technology, a few LAN switches can easily connect hundreds of
machines as a working cluster. A WAN can connect many local clusters to form a very large cluster
of clusters. In this sense, one can build a massive system with millions of computers connected to
edge networks.
Massive systems are considered highly scalable, and can reach web-scale connectivity, either
physically or logically. In Table 1.2, massive systems are classified into four groups: clusters, P2P
networks, computing grids, and Internet clouds over huge data centers. In terms of node number,
these four system classes may involve hundreds, thousands, or even millions of computers as
participating nodes. These machines work collectively, cooperatively, or collaboratively at various
levels. The table entries characterize these four system classes in various technical and application
aspects.
Table 1.2 Classification of Parallel and Distributed Computing Systems
Functionality,
Applications
Computer
Clusters
[10,28,38]
Peer-to-Peer
Networks
[34,46]
Data/
Computational
Grids [6,18,51]
Cloud Platforms
[1,9,11,12,30]
Architecture,
Network
Connectivity, and
Size
Network of
compute nodes
interconnected by
SAN, LAN, or
WAN
hierarchically
Flexible network
of client machines
logically
connected by an
overlay network
Heterogeneous
clusters
interconnected by
high-speed
network links over
selected resource
sites
Virtualized cluster
of servers over
data centers via
SLA
Control and
Resources
Management
Homogeneous
nodes with
distributed
control, running
UNIX or Linux
Autonomous
client nodes, free
in and out, with
self-organization
Centralized
control, server￾oriented with
authenticated
security
Dynamic resource
provisioning of
servers, storage,
and networks
Applications and
Network-centric
Services
High-performance
computing,
search engines,
and web services,
etc.
Most appealing to
business file
sharing, content
delivery, and
social networking
Distributed
supercomputing,
global problem
solving, and data
center services
Upgraded web
search, utility
computing, and
outsourced
computing
services
Representative
Operational
Systems
Google search
engine, SunBlade,
IBM Road
Runner, Cray
XT4, etc.
Gnutella, eMule,
BitTorrent,
Napster, KaZaA,
Skype, JXTA
TeraGrid,
GriPhyN, UK
EGEE, D-Grid,
ChinaGrid, etc.
Google App
Engine, IBM
Bluecloud, AWS,
and Microsoft
Azure
1.3 System Models for Distributed and Cloud Computing 27
From the application perspective, clusters are most popular in supercomputing applications. In
2009, 417 of the Top 500 supercomputers were built with cluster architecture. It is fair to say that
clusters have laid the necessary foundation for building large-scale grids and clouds. P2P networks
appeal most to business applications. However, the content industry was reluctant to accept P2P
technology for lack of copyright protection in ad hoc networks. Many national grids built in the
past decade were underutilized for lack of reliable middleware or well-coded applications. Potential
advantages of cloud computing include its low cost and simplicity for both providers and users.
1.3.1 Clusters of Cooperative Computers
A computing cluster consists of interconnected stand-alone computers which work cooperatively as
a single integrated computing resource. In the past, clustered computer systems have demonstrated
impressive results in handling heavy workloads with large data sets.
1.3.1.1 Cluster Architecture
Figure 1.15 shows the architecture of a typical server cluster built around a low-latency, high￾bandwidth interconnection network. This network can be as simple as a SAN (e.g., Myrinet) or a
LAN (e.g., Ethernet). To build a larger cluster with more nodes, the interconnection network can be
built with multiple levels of Gigabit Ethernet, Myrinet, or InfiniBand switches. Through hierarchical
construction using a SAN, LAN, or WAN, one can build scalable clusters with an increasing
number of nodes. The cluster is connected to the Internet via a virtual private network (VPN)
gateway. The gateway IP address locates the cluster. The system image of a computer is decided by
the way the OS manages the shared cluster resources. Most clusters have loosely coupled node
computers. All resources of a server node are managed by their own OS. Thus, most clusters have
multiple system images as a result of having many autonomous nodes under different OS control.
I/O devices Disk arrays
Gateway
S2
Sn–1 Sn
S1
S0
A Cluster
Servers The Internet
SAN, LAN, NAS Networks
(Ethernet, Myrinet, InfiniBand, etc.)
FIGURE 1.15
A cluster of servers interconnected by a high-bandwidth SAN or LAN with shared I/O devices and disk arrays;
the cluster acts as a single computer attached to the Internet.
28 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
1.3.1.2 Single-System Image
Greg Pfister [38] has indicated that an ideal cluster should merge multiple system images into
a single-system image (SSI). Cluster designers desire a cluster operating system or some middle￾ware to support SSI at various levels, including the sharing of CPUs, memory, and I/O across all
cluster nodes. An SSI is an illusion created by software or hardware that presents a collection of
resources as one integrated, powerful resource. SSI makes the cluster appear like a single
machine to the user. A cluster with multiple system images is nothing but a collection of inde￾pendent computers.
1.3.1.3 Hardware, Software, and Middleware Support
In Chapter 2, we will discuss cluster design principles for both small and large clusters. Clusters
exploring massive parallelism are commonly known as MPPs. Almost all HPC clusters in the Top
500 list are also MPPs. The building blocks are computer nodes (PCs, workstations, servers, or
SMP), special communication software such as PVM or MPI, and a network interface card in each
computer node. Most clusters run under the Linux OS. The computer nodes are interconnected by a
high-bandwidth network (such as Gigabit Ethernet, Myrinet, InfiniBand, etc.).
Special cluster middleware supports are needed to create SSI or high availability (HA). Both
sequential and parallel applications can run on the cluster, and special parallel environments are
needed to facilitate use of the cluster resources. For example, distributed memory has multiple
images. Users may want all distributed memory to be shared by all servers by forming distribu￾ted shared memory (DSM). Many SSI features are expensive or difficult to achieve at various
cluster operational levels. Instead of achieving SSI, many clusters are loosely coupled machines.
Using virtualization, one can build many virtual clusters dynamically, upon user demand. We
will discuss virtual clusters in Chapter 3 and the use of virtual clusters for cloud computing in
Chapters 4, 5, 6, and 9.
1.3.1.4 Major Cluster Design Issues
Unfortunately, a cluster-wide OS for complete resource sharing is not available yet. Middleware
or OS extensions were developed at the user space to achieve SSI at selected functional levels.
Without this middleware, cluster nodes cannot work together effectively to achieve cooperative
computing. The software environments and applications must rely on the middleware to achieve
high performance. The cluster benefits come from scalable performance, efficient message passing,
high system availability, seamless fault tolerance, and cluster-wide job management, as summarized
in Table 1.3. We will address these issues in Chapter 2.
1.3.2 Grid Computing Infrastructures
In the past 30 years, users have experienced a natural growth path from Internet to web and grid
computing services. Internet services such as the Telnet command enables a local computer to con￾nect to a remote computer. A web service such as HTTP enables remote access of remote web
pages. Grid computing is envisioned to allow close interaction among applications running on dis￾tant computers simultaneously. Forbes Magazine has projected the global growth of the IT-based
economy from $1 trillion in 2001 to $20 trillion by 2015. The evolution from Internet to web and
grid services is certainly playing a major role in this growth.
1.3 System Models for Distributed and Cloud Computing 29
1.3.2.1 Computational Grids
Like an electric utility power grid, a computing grid offers an infrastructure that couples computers,
software/middleware, special instruments, and people and sensors together. The grid is often con￾structed across LAN, WAN, or Internet backbone networks at a regional, national, or global scale.
Enterprises or organizations present grids as integrated computing resources. They can also be
viewed as virtual platforms to support virtual organizations. The computers used in a grid are pri￾marily workstations, servers, clusters, and supercomputers. Personal computers, laptops, and PDAs
can be used as access devices to a grid system.
Figure 1.16 shows an example computational grid built over multiple resource sites owned by
different organizations. The resource sites offer complementary computing resources, including
workstations, large servers, a mesh of processors, and Linux clusters to satisfy a chain of computa￾tional needs. The grid is built across various IP broadband networks including LANs and WANs
already used by enterprises or organizations over the Internet. The grid is presented to users as an
integrated resource pool as shown in the upper half of the figure.
Special instruments may be involved such as using the radio telescope in SETI@Home
search of life in the galaxy and the austrophysics@Swineburne for pulsars. At the server end,
the grid is a network. At the client end, we see wired or wireless terminal devices. The grid
integrates the computing, communication, contents, and transactions as rented services. Enter￾prises and consumers form the user base, which then defines the usage trends and service char￾acteristics. Many national and international grids will be reported in Chapter 7, the NSF
Table 1.3 Critical Cluster Design Issues and Feasible Implementations
Features Functional Characterization Feasible Implementations
Availability and Support Hardware and software support for
sustained HA in cluster
Failover, failback, check pointing,
rollback recovery, nonstop OS, etc.
Hardware Fault Tolerance Automated failure management to
eliminate all single points of failure
Component redundancy, hot
swapping, RAID, multiple power
supplies, etc.
Single System Image (SSI) Achieving SSI at functional level with
hardware and software support,
middleware, or OS extensions
Hardware mechanisms or
middleware support to achieve DSM
at coherent cache level
Efficient Communications To reduce message-passing system
overhead and hide latencies
Fast message passing, active
messages, enhanced MPI library, etc.
Cluster-wide Job
Management
Using a global job management
system with better scheduling and
monitoring
Application of single-job
management systems such as LSF,
Codine, etc.
Dynamic Load Balancing Balancing the workload of all
processing nodes along with failure
recovery
Workload monitoring, process
migration, job replication and gang
scheduling, etc.
Scalability and
Programmability
Adding more servers to a cluster or
adding more clusters to a grid as
the workload or data set increases
Use of scalable interconnect,
performance monitoring, distributed
execution environment, and better
software tools
30 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
TeraGrid in US, EGEE in Europe, and ChinaGrid in China for various distributed scientific grid
applications.
1.3.2.2 Grid Families
Grid technology demands new distributed computing models, software/middleware support, network
protocols, and hardware infrastructures. National grid projects are followed by industrial grid plat￾form development by IBM, Microsoft, Sun, HP, Dell, Cisco, EMC, Platform Computing, and
others. New grid service providers (GSPs) and new grid applications have emerged rapidly, similar
to the growth of Internet and web services in the past two decades. In Table 1.4, grid systems are
classified in essentially two categories: computational or data grids and P2P grids. Computing or
data grids are built primarily at the national level. In Chapter 7, we will cover grid applications and
lessons learned.
Expensive
equipment
IP Broadband network
The Internet
Grid
Databases
FIGURE 1.16
Computational grid or data grid providing computing utility, data, and information services through resource
sharing and cooperation among participating organizations.
(Courtesy of Z. Xu, Chinese Academy of Science, 2004)
Table 1.4 Two Grid Computing Infrastructures and Representative Systems
Design Issues
Computational and Data
Grids P2P Grids
Grid Applications Reported Distributed supercomputing,
National Grid initiatives, etc.
Open grid with P2P flexibility, all
resources from client machines
Representative Systems TeraGrid built in US, ChinaGrid in
China, and the e-Science grid
built in UK
JXTA, FightAid@home,
SETI@home
Development Lessons Learned Restricted user groups,
middleware bugs, protocols to
acquire resources
Unreliable user-contributed
resources, limited to a few apps
1.3 System Models for Distributed and Cloud Computing 31
32 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
1.3.3 Peer-to-Peer Network Families
An example of a well-established distributed system is the client-server architecture. In this sce￾nario, client machines (PCs and workstations) are connected to a central server for compute, e-mail,
file access, and database applications. The P2P architecture offers a distributed model of networked
systems. First, a P2P network is client-oriented instead of server-oriented. In this section, P2P sys￾tems are introduced at the physical level and overlay networks at the logical level.
1.3.3.1 P2P Systems
In a P2P system, every node acts as both a client and a server, providing part of the system
resources. Peer machines are simply client computers connected to the Internet. All client machines
act autonomously to join or leave the system freely. This implies that no master-slave relationship
exists among the peers. No central coordination or central database is needed. In other words, no
peer machine has a global view of the entire P2P system. The system is self-organizing with distrib￾uted control.
Figure 1.17 shows the architecture of a P2P network at two abstraction levels. Initially, the peers
are totally unrelated. Each peer machine joins or leaves the P2P network voluntarily. Only the parti￾cipating peers form the physical network at any time. Unlike the cluster or grid, a P2P network does
not use a dedicated interconnection network. The physical network is simply an ad hoc network
formed at various Internet domains randomly using the TCP/IP and NAI protocols. Thus, the physi￾cal network varies in size and topology dynamically due to the free membership in the P2P
network.
1.3.3.2 Overlay Networks
Data items or files are distributed in the participating peers. Based on communication or file-sharing
needs, the peer IDs form an overlay network at the logical level. This overlay is a virtual network
Overlay network
Virtual
link
Physical
link
AP
IP network
FIGURE 1.17
The structure of a P2P system by mapping a physical IP network to an overlay network built with virtual
links.
(Courtesy of Zhenyu Li, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2010)
formed by mapping each physical machine with its ID, logically, through a virtual mapping as
shown in Figure 1.17. When a new peer joins the system, its peer ID is added as a node in the
overlay network. When an existing peer leaves the system, its peer ID is removed from the overlay
network automatically. Therefore, it is the P2P overlay network that characterizes the logical con￾nectivity among the peers.
There are two types of overlay networks: unstructured and structured. An unstructured overlay
network is characterized by a random graph. There is no fixed route to send messages or files
among the nodes. Often, flooding is applied to send a query to all nodes in an unstructured overlay,
thus resulting in heavy network traffic and nondeterministic search results. Structured overlay net￾works follow certain connectivity topology and rules for inserting and removing nodes (peer IDs)
from the overlay graph. Routing mechanisms are developed to take advantage of the structured
overlays.
1.3.3.3 P2P Application Families
Based on application, P2P networks are classified into four groups, as shown in Table 1.5. The first
family is for distributed file sharing of digital contents (music, videos, etc.) on the P2P network. This
includes many popular P2P networks such as Gnutella, Napster, and BitTorrent, among others. Colla￾boration P2P networks include MSN or Skype chatting, instant messaging, and collaborative design,
among others. The third family is for distributed P2P computing in specific applications. For example,
SETI@home provides 25 Tflops of distributed computing power, collectively, over 3 million Internet
host machines. Other P2P platforms, such as JXTA, .NET, and FightingAID@home, support naming,
discovery, communication, security, and resource aggregation in some P2P applications. We will dis￾cuss these topics in more detail in Chapters 8 and 9.
1.3.3.4 P2P Computing Challenges
P2P computing faces three types of heterogeneity problems in hardware, software, and network
requirements. There are too many hardware models and architectures to select from; incompat￾ibility exists between software and the OS; and different network connections and protocols
Table 1.5 Major Categories of P2P Network Families [46]
System
Features
Distributed File
Sharing
Collaborative
Platform
Distributed P2P
Computing P2P Platform
Attractive
Applications
Content
distribution of MP3
music, video, open
software, etc.
Instant messaging,
collaborative
design and gaming
Scientific
exploration and
social networking
Open networks for
public resources
Operational
Problems
Loose security and
serious online
copyright violations
Lack of trust,
disturbed by
spam, privacy, and
peer collusion
Security holes,
selfish partners,
and peer collusion
Lack of standards
or protection
protocols
Example
Systems
Gnutella, Napster,
eMule, BitTorrent,
Aimster, KaZaA,
etc.
ICQ, AIM, Groove,
Magi, Multiplayer
Games, Skype,
etc.
SETI@home,
Geonome@home,
etc.
JXTA, .NET,
FightingAid@home,
etc.
1.3 System Models for Distributed and Cloud Computing 33
34 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
make it too complex to apply in real applications. We need system scalability as the workload
increases. System scaling is directly related to performance and bandwidth. P2P networks do
have these properties. Data location is also important to affect collective performance. Data
locality, network proximity, and interoperability are three design objectives in distributed P2P
applications.
P2P performance is affected by routing efficiency and self-organization by participating peers.
Fault tolerance, failure management, and load balancing are other important issues in using overlay
networks. Lack of trust among peers poses another problem. Peers are strangers to one another.
Security, privacy, and copyright violations are major worries by those in the industry in terms of
applying P2P technology in business applications [35]. In a P2P network, all clients provide resources
including computing power, storage space, and I/O bandwidth. The distributed nature of P2P net￾works also increases robustness, because limited peer failures do not form a single point of failure.
By replicating data in multiple peers, one can easily lose data in failed nodes. On the other hand,
disadvantages of P2P networks do exist. Because the system is not centralized, managing it is difficult.
In addition, the system lacks security. Anyone can log on to the system and cause damage or abuse.
Further, all client computers connected to a P2P network cannot be considered reliable or virus-free. In
summary, P2P networks are reliable for a small number of peer nodes. They are only useful for applica￾tions that require a low level of security and have no concern for data sensitivity. We will discuss P2P
networks in Chapter 8, and extending P2P technology to social networking in Chapter 9.
1.3.4 Cloud Computing over the Internet
Gordon Bell, Jim Gray, and Alex Szalay [5] have advocated: “Computational science is changing to
be data-intensive. Supercomputers must be balanced systems, not just CPU farms but also petascale
I/O and networking arrays.” In the future, working with large data sets will typically mean sending
the computations (programs) to the data, rather than copying the data to the workstations. This
reflects the trend in IT of moving computing and data from desktops to large data centers, where
there is on-demand provision of software, hardware, and data as a service. This data explosion has
promoted the idea of cloud computing.
Cloud computing has been defined differently by many users and designers. For example, IBM, a
major player in cloud computing, has defined it as follows: “A cloud is a pool of virtualized computer
resources. A cloud can host a variety of different workloads, including batch-style backend jobs and
interactive and user-facing applications.” Based on this definition, a cloud allows workloads to be
deployed and scaled out quickly through rapid provisioning of virtual or physical machines. The cloud
supports redundant, self-recovering, highly scalable programming models that allow workloads to
recover from many unavoidable hardware/software failures. Finally, the cloud system should be able to
monitor resource use in real time to enable rebalancing of allocations when needed.
1.3.4.1 Internet Clouds
Cloud computing applies a virtualized platform with elastic resources on demand by provisioning
hardware, software, and data sets dynamically (see Figure 1.18). The idea is to move desktop
computing to a service-oriented platform using server clusters and huge databases at data centers.
Cloud computing leverages its low cost and simplicity to benefit both users and providers. Machine
virtualization has enabled such cost-effectiveness. Cloud computing intends to satisfy many user
applications simultaneously. The cloud ecosystem must be designed to be secure, trustworthy, and
dependable. Some computer users think of the cloud as a centralized resource pool. Others consider
the cloud to be a server cluster which practices distributed computing over all the servers used.
1.3.4.2 The Cloud Landscape
Traditionally, a distributed computing system tends to be owned and operated by an autonomous
administrative domain (e.g., a research laboratory or company) for on-premises computing needs.
However, these traditional systems have encountered several performance bottlenecks: constant sys￾tem maintenance, poor utilization, and increasing costs associated with hardware/software upgrades.
Cloud computing as an on-demand computing paradigm resolves or relieves us from these problems.
Figure 1.19 depicts the cloud landscape and major cloud players, based on three cloud service mod￾els. Chapters 4, 6, and 9 provide details regarding these cloud service offerings. Chapter 3 covers the
relevant virtualization tools.
• Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) This model puts together infrastructures demanded by
users—namely servers, storage, networks, and the data center fabric. The user can deploy and
run on multiple VMs running guest OSes on specific applications. The user does not manage or
control the underlying cloud infrastructure, but can specify when to request and release the
needed resources.
• Platform as a Service (PaaS) This model enables the user to deploy user-built applications
onto a virtualized cloud platform. PaaS includes middleware, databases, development tools, and
some runtime support such as Web 2.0 and Java. The platform includes both hardware and
software integrated with specific programming interfaces. The provider supplies the API and
software tools (e.g., Java, Python, Web 2.0, .NET). The user is freed from managing the cloud
infrastructure.
• Software as a Service (SaaS) This refers to browser-initiated application software over
thousands of paid cloud customers. The SaaS model applies to business processes, industry
applications, consumer relationship management (CRM), enterprise resources planning (ERP),
human resources (HR), and collaborative applications. On the customer side, there is no upfront
investment in servers or software licensing. On the provider side, costs are rather low, compared
with conventional hosting of user applications.
Storage
Submit requests
Paid services
User
Service
Internet
cloud Network
Software Hardware
FIGURE 1.18
Virtualized resources from data centers to form an Internet cloud, provisioned with hardware, software,
storage, network, and services for paid users to run their applications.
1.3 System Models for Distributed and Cloud Computing 35
Internet clouds offer four deployment modes: private, public, managed, and hybrid [11]. These
modes demand different levels of security implications. The different SLAs imply that the security
responsibility is shared among all the cloud providers, the cloud resource consumers, and the third￾party cloud-enabled software providers. Advantages of cloud computing have been advocated by
many IT experts, industry leaders, and computer science researchers.
In Chapter 4, we will describe major cloud platforms that have been built and various cloud
services offerings. The following list highlights eight reasons to adapt the cloud for upgraded
Internet applications and web services:
1. Desired location in areas with protected space and higher energy efficiency
2. Sharing of peak-load capacity among a large pool of users, improving overall utilization
3. Separation of infrastructure maintenance duties from domain-specific application development
4. Significant reduction in cloud computing cost, compared with traditional computing paradigms
5. Cloud computing programming and application development
6. Service and data discovery and content/service distribution
7. Privacy, security, copyright, and reliability issues
8. Service agreements, business models, and pricing policies
1.4 SOFTWARE ENVIRONMENTS FOR DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS
AND CLOUDS
This section introduces popular software environments for using distributed and cloud computing
systems. Chapters 5 and 6 discuss this subject in more depth.
PaaS: Provide a
programming
environment to
build and manage
the deployment
of a cloud
application
IaaS: Provide a data
center and a way to
host client VMs and
data
SaaS: Delivery of
software from the
cloud to the desktop
FIGURE 1.19
Three cloud service models in a cloud landscape of major providers.
(Courtesy of Dennis Gannon, keynote address at Cloudcom2010 [19] )
36 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
1.4.1 Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)
In grids/web services, Java, and CORBA, an entity is, respectively, a service, a Java object, and a
CORBA distributed object in a variety of languages. These architectures build on the traditional
seven Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) layers that provide the base networking abstractions. On
top of this we have a base software environment, which would be .NET or Apache Axis for web
services, the Java Virtual Machine for Java, and a broker network for CORBA. On top of this base
environment one would build a higher level environment reflecting the special features of the
distributed computing environment. This starts with entity interfaces and inter-entity communication,
which rebuild the top four OSI layers but at the entity and not the bit level. Figure 1.20 shows the
layered architecture for distributed entities used in web services and grid systems.
1.4.1.1 Layered Architecture for Web Services and Grids
The entity interfaces correspond to the Web Services Description Language (WSDL), Java method, and
CORBA interface definition language (IDL) specifications in these example distributed systems. These
interfaces are linked with customized, high-level communication systems: SOAP, RMI, and IIOP in the
three examples. These communication systems support features including particular message patterns
(such as Remote Procedure Call or RPC), fault recovery, and specialized routing. Often, these commu￾nication systems are built on message-oriented middleware (enterprise bus) infrastructure such as Web￾Sphere MQ or Java Message Service (JMS) which provide rich functionality and support virtualization
of routing, senders, and recipients.
In the case of fault tolerance, the features in the Web Services Reliable Messaging (WSRM)
framework mimic the OSI layer capability (as in TCP fault tolerance) modified to match the differ￾ent abstractions (such as messages versus packets, virtualized addressing) at the entity levels. Secur￾ity is a critical capability that either uses or reimplements the capabilities seen in concepts such as
Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) and secure sockets in the OSI layers. Entity communication is
supported by higher level services for registries, metadata, and management of the entities discussed
in Section 5.4.
Application specific services/grids
Generally useful services and grids
Workflow
Service management
Service discovery and information
Service Internet transport Protocol
Service interfaces
Base hosting environment
Protocol HTTP FTP DNS ...
Presentation XDR ...
Session SSH ...
Transport TCP UDP ...
Network IP ...
Data link/Physical
Bit level
Internet
Higher
level
services
Service
context
Service
Internet
FIGURE 1.20
Layered achitecture for web services and the grids.
1.4 Software Environments for Distributed Systems and Clouds 37
38 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
Here, one might get several models with, for example, JNDI (Jini and Java Naming and Directory
Interface) illustrating different approaches within the Java distributed object model. The CORBA Trad￾ing Service, UDDI (Universal Description, Discovery, and Integration), LDAP (Lightweight Directory
Access Protocol), and ebXML (Electronic Business using eXtensible Markup Language) are other
examples of discovery and information services described in Section 5.4. Management services include
service state and lifetime support; examples include the CORBA Life Cycle and Persistent states, the
different Enterprise JavaBeans models, Jini’s lifetime model, and a suite of web services specifications
in Chapter 5. The above language or interface terms form a collection of entity-level capabilities.
The latter can have performance advantages and offers a “shared memory” model allowing more
convenient exchange of information. However, the distributed model has two critical advantages:
namely, higher performance (from multiple CPUs when communication is unimportant) and a
cleaner separation of software functions with clear software reuse and maintenance advantages. The
distributed model is expected to gain popularity as the default approach to software systems. In the
earlier years, CORBA and Java approaches were used in distributed systems rather than today’s
SOAP, XML, or REST (Representational State Transfer).
1.4.1.2 Web Services and Tools
Loose coupling and support of heterogeneous implementations make services more attractive than
distributed objects. Figure 1.20 corresponds to two choices of service architecture: web services
or REST systems (these are further discussed in Chapter 5). Both web services and REST sys￾tems have very distinct approaches to building reliable interoperable systems. In web services,
one aims to fully specify all aspects of the service and its environment. This specification is car￾ried with communicated messages using Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP). The hosting
environment then becomes a universal distributed operating system with fully distributed capabil￾ity carried by SOAP messages. This approach has mixed success as it has been hard to agree on
key parts of the protocol and even harder to efficiently implement the protocol by software such
as Apache Axis.
In the REST approach, one adopts simplicity as the universal principle and delegates most of
the difficult problems to application (implementation-specific) software. In a web services language,
REST has minimal information in the header, and the message body (that is opaque to generic
message processing) carries all the needed information. REST architectures are clearly more appro￾priate for rapid technology environments. However, the ideas in web services are important and
probably will be required in mature systems at a different level in the stack (as part of the applica￾tion). Note that REST can use XML schemas but not those that are part of SOAP; “XML over
HTTP” is a popular design choice in this regard. Above the communication and management
layers, we have the ability to compose new entities or distributed programs by integrating several
entities together.
In CORBA and Java, the distributed entities are linked with RPCs, and the simplest way to build
composite applications is to view the entities as objects and use the traditional ways of linking them
together. For Java, this could be as simple as writing a Java program with method calls replaced by
Remote Method Invocation (RMI), while CORBA supports a similar model with a syntax reflecting the
C++ style of its entity (object) interfaces. Allowing the term “grid” to refer to a single service or to
represent a collection of services, here sensors represent entities that output data (as messages), and
grids and clouds represent collections of services that have multiple message-based inputs and outputs.
1.4.1.3 The Evolution of SOA
As shown in Figure 1.21, service-oriented architecture (SOA) has evolved over the years. SOA
applies to building grids, clouds, grids of clouds, clouds of grids, clouds of clouds (also known as
interclouds), and systems of systems in general. A large number of sensors provide data-collection
services, denoted in the figure as SS (sensor service). A sensor can be a ZigBee device, a Bluetooth
device, a WiFi access point, a personal computer, a GPA, or a wireless phone, among other things.
Raw data is collected by sensor services. All the SS devices interact with large or small computers,
many forms of grids, databases, the compute cloud, the storage cloud, the filter cloud, the discovery
cloud, and so on. Filter services (fs in the figure) are used to eliminate unwanted raw data, in order
to respond to specific requests from the web, the grid, or web services.
A collection of filter services forms a filter cloud. We will cover various clouds for compute,
storage, filter, and discovery in Chapters 4, 5, and 6, and various grids, P2P networks, and the IoT
in Chapters 7, 8, and 9. SOA aims to search for, or sort out, the useful data from the massive
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S S
S
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
S
S
fs
S
S
S
S
Another
grid
Another
grid
Another
grid
Database
Compute
cloud Storage
cloud
Sensor or data
interchange
service
Traditional grid
with exposed
services
Filter
cloud
Filter
cloud
Filter
cloud
Filter
cloud
Filter
cloud Filter
cloud
Discovery
cloud
Discovery
cloud
Another
service
fs
fs fs
fs
fs
Filter
service
fs
fs
fs
fs
fs
fs
Filter
service
fs
fs
fs
fs
fs
fs
Filter
service
fs
fs
fs
fs
fs
fs
Filter
service
Raw data Data Information Knowledge Wisdom Decisions
FIGURE 1.21
The evolution of SOA: grids of clouds and grids, where “SS” refers to a sensor service and “fs” to a filter or
transforming service.
1.4 Software Environments for Distributed Systems and Clouds 39
SS
SS
Portal
Inter-service messages
40 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
amounts of raw data items. Processing this data will generate useful information, and subsequently,
the knowledge for our daily use. In fact, wisdom or intelligence is sorted out of large knowledge
bases. Finally, we make intelligent decisions based on both biological and machine wisdom. Read￾ers will see these structures more clearly in subsequent chapters.
Most distributed systems require a web interface or portal. For raw data collected by a large
number of sensors to be transformed into useful information or knowledge, the data stream may go
through a sequence of compute, storage, filter, and discovery clouds. Finally, the inter-service mes￾sages converge at the portal, which is accessed by all users. Two example portals, OGFCE and
HUBzero, are described in Section 5.3 using both web service (portlet) and Web 2.0 (gadget) tech￾nologies. Many distributed programming models are also built on top of these basic constructs.
1.4.1.4 Grids versus Clouds
The boundary between grids and clouds are getting blurred in recent years. For web services, work￾flow technologies are used to coordinate or orchestrate services with certain specifications used to
define critical business process models such as two-phase transactions. Section 5.2 discusses the gen￾eral approach used in workflow, the BPEL Web Service standard, and several important workflow
approaches including Pegasus, Taverna, Kepler, Trident, and Swift. In all approaches, one is building
a collection of services which together tackle all or part of a distributed computing problem.
In general, a grid system applies static resources, while a cloud emphasizes elastic resources. For
some researchers, the differences between grids and clouds are limited only in dynamic resource
allocation based on virtualization and autonomic computing. One can build a grid out of multiple
clouds. This type of grid can do a better job than a pure cloud, because it can explicitly support
negotiated resource allocation. Thus one may end up building with a system of systems: such as a
cloud of clouds, a grid of clouds, or a cloud of grids, or inter-clouds as a basic SOA architecture.
1.4.2 Trends toward Distributed Operating Systems
The computers in most distributed systems are loosely coupled. Thus, a distributed system inher￾ently has multiple system images. This is mainly due to the fact that all node machines run with an
independent operating system. To promote resource sharing and fast communication among node
machines, it is best to have a distributed OS that manages all resources coherently and efficiently.
Such a system is most likely to be a closed system, and it will likely rely on message passing and
RPCs for internode communications. It should be pointed out that a distributed OS is crucial for
upgrading the performance, efficiency, and flexibility of distributed applications.
1.4.2.1 Distributed Operating Systems
Tanenbaum [26] identifies three approaches for distributing resource management functions in a
distributed computer system. The first approach is to build a network OS over a large number of
heterogeneous OS platforms. Such an OS offers the lowest transparency to users, and is essentially
a distributed file system, with independent computers relying on file sharing as a means of
communication. The second approach is to develop middleware to offer a limited degree of resource
sharing, similar to the MOSIX/OS developed for clustered systems (see Section 2.4.4). The third
approach is to develop a truly distributed OS to achieve higher use or system transparency.
Table 1.6 compares the functionalities of these three distributed operating systems.
1.4.2.2 Amoeba versus DCE
DCE is a middleware-based system for distributed computing environments. The Amoeba was
academically developed at Free University in the Netherlands. The Open Software Foundation
(OSF) has pushed the use of DCE for distributed computing. However, the Amoeba, DCE, and
MOSIX2 are still research prototypes that are primarily used in academia. No successful commer￾cial OS products followed these research systems.
We need new web-based operating systems to support virtualization of resources in distributed
environments. This is still a wide-open area of research. To balance the resource management work￾load, the functionalities of such a distributed OS should be distributed to any available server. In
this sense, the conventional OS runs only on a centralized platform. With the distribution of OS
services, the distributed OS design should take a lightweight microkernel approach like the Amoeba
[46], or should extend an existing OS like the DCE [7] by extending UNIX. The trend is to free
users from most resource management duties.
1.4.2.3 MOSIX2 for Linux Clusters
MOSIX2 is a distributed OS [3], which runs with a virtualization layer in the Linux environment.
This layer provides a partial single-system image to user applications. MOSIX2 supports both
sequential and parallel applications, and discovers resources and migrates software processes among
Linux nodes. MOSIX2 can manage a Linux cluster or a grid of multiple clusters. Flexible management
Table 1.6 Feature Comparison of Three Distributed Operating Systems
Distributed OS
Functionality
AMOEBA Developed
at Vrije University [46]
DCE as OSF/1 by
Open Software
Foundation [7]
MOSIX for Linux
Clusters at Hebrew
University [3]
History and Current
System Status
Written in C and tested
in the European
community; version 5.2
released in 1995
Built as a user
extension on top of
UNIX, VMS, Windows,
OS/2, etc.
Developed since 1977,
now called MOSIX2
used in HPC Linux and
GPU clusters
Distributed OS
Architecture
Microkernel-based and
location-transparent,
uses many servers to
handle files, directory,
replication, run, boot,
and TCP/IP services
Middleware OS
providing a platform for
running distributed
applications; The
system supports RPC,
security, and threads
A distributed OS with
resource discovery,
process migration,
runtime support, load
balancing, flood control,
configuration, etc.
OS Kernel, Middleware,
and Virtualization
Support
A special microkernel
that handles low-level
process, memory, I/O,
and communication
functions
DCE packages handle
file,time, directory,
security services, RPC,
and authentication at
middleware or user
space
MOSIX2 runs with
Linux 2.6; extensions
for use in multiple
clusters and clouds
with provisioned VMs
Communication
Mechanisms
Uses a network-layer
FLIP protocol and RPC
to implement point-to￾point and group
communication
RPC supports
authenticated
communication and
other security services
in user programs
Using PVM, MPI in
collective
communications,
priority process control,
and queuing services
1.4 Software Environments for Distributed Systems and Clouds 41
of a grid allows owners of clusters to share their computational resources among multiple cluster
owners. A MOSIX-enabled grid can extend indefinitely as long as trust exists among the cluster owners.
The MOSIX2 is being explored for managing resources in all sorts of clusters, including Linux clusters,
GPU clusters, grids, and even clouds if VMs are used. We will study MOSIX and its applications in
Section 2.4.4.
1.4.2.4 Transparency in Programming Environments
Figure 1.22 shows the concept of a transparent computing infrastructure for future computing
platforms. The user data, applications, OS, and hardware are separated into four levels. Data is
owned by users, independent of the applications. The OS provides clear interfaces, standard
programming interfaces, or system calls to application programmers. In future cloud infrastruc￾ture, the hardware will be separated by standard interfaces from the OS. Thus, users will be
able to choose from different OSes on top of the hardware devices they prefer to use. To sepa￾rate user data from specific application programs, users can enable cloud applications as SaaS.
Thus, users can switch among different services. The data will not be bound to specific
applications.
1.4.3 Parallel and Distributed Programming Models
In this section, we will explore four programming models for distributed computing with expected
scalable performance and application flexibility. Table 1.7 summarizes three of these models, along
with some software tool sets developed in recent years. As we will discuss, MPI is the most popular
programming model for message-passing systems. Google’s MapReduce and BigTable are for
User data Data storage
Standard programming interface for various environment
Standard hardware interface for users to choose different OSes
Data owned by users,
independent of applications.
Application
Operating
systems
Hardware
FIGURE 1.22
A transparent computing environment that separates the user data, application, OS, and hardware in time
and space – an ideal model for cloud computing.
42 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
effective use of resources from Internet clouds and data centers. Service clouds demand extending
Hadoop, EC2, and S3 to facilitate distributed computing over distributed storage systems. Many
other models have also been proposed or developed in the past. In Chapters 5 and 6, we will dis￾cuss parallel and distributed programming in more details.
1.4.3.1 Message-Passing Interface (MPI)
This is the primary programming standard used to develop parallel and concurrent programs to run
on a distributed system. MPI is essentially a library of subprograms that can be called from C or
FORTRAN to write parallel programs running on a distributed system. The idea is to embody
clusters, grid systems, and P2P systems with upgraded web services and utility computing applica￾tions. Besides MPI, distributed programming can be also supported with low-level primitives such
as the Parallel Virtual Machine (PVM). Both MPI and PVM are described in Hwang and Xu [28].
1.4.3.2 MapReduce
This is a web programming model for scalable data processing on large clusters over large data sets
[16]. The model is applied mainly in web-scale search and cloud computing applications. The user
specifies a Map function to generate a set of intermediate key/value pairs. Then the user applies a
Reduce function to merge all intermediate values with the same intermediate key. MapReduce is
highly scalable to explore high degrees of parallelism at different job levels. A typical MapReduce
computation process can handle terabytes of data on tens of thousands or more client machines.
Hundreds of MapReduce programs can be executed simultaneously; in fact, thousands of MapRe￾duce jobs are executed on Google’s clusters every day.
1.4.3.3 Hadoop Library
Hadoop offers a software platform that was originally developed by a Yahoo! group. The pack￾age enables users to write and run applications over vast amounts of distributed data. Users can
easily scale Hadoop to store and process petabytes of data in the web space. Also, Hadoop is
economical in that it comes with an open source version of MapReduce that minimizes overhead
Table 1.7 Parallel and Distributed Programming Models and Tool Sets
Model Description Features
MPI A library of subprograms that can be
called from C or FORTRAN to write
parallel programs running on distributed
computer systems [6,28,42]
Specify synchronous or asynchronous
point-to-point and collective
communication commands and I/O
operations in user programs for
message-passing execution
MapReduce A web programming model for scalable
data processing on large clusters over
large data sets, or in web search
operations [16]
Map function generates a set of
intermediate key/value pairs; Reduce
function merges all intermediate values
with the same key
Hadoop A software library to write and run large
user applications on vast data sets in
business applications (http://hadoop
.apache.org/core)
A scalable, economical, efficient, and
reliable tool for providing users with
easy access of commercial clusters
1.4 Software Environments for Distributed Systems and Clouds 43
in task spawning and massive data communication. It is efficient, as it processes data with a high
degree of parallelism across a large number of commodity nodes, and it is reliable in that it auto￾matically keeps multiple data copies to facilitate redeployment of computing tasks upon unex￾pected system failures.
1.4.3.4 Open Grid Services Architecture (OGSA)
The development of grid infrastructure is driven by large-scale distributed computing applications.
These applications must count on a high degree of resource and data sharing. Table 1.8 introduces
OGSA as a common standard for general public use of grid services. Genesis II is a realization of
OGSA. Key features include a distributed execution environment, Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
services using a local certificate authority (CA), trust management, and security policies in grid
computing.
1.4.3.5 Globus Toolkits and Extensions
Globus is a middleware library jointly developed by the U.S. Argonne National Laboratory and
USC Information Science Institute over the past decade. This library implements some of the
OGSA standards for resource discovery, allocation, and security enforcement in a grid environment.
The Globus packages support multisite mutual authentication with PKI certificates. The current ver￾sion of Globus, GT 4, has been in use since 2008. In addition, IBM has extended Globus for busi￾ness applications. We will cover Globus and other grid computing middleware in more detail in
Chapter 7.
1.5 PERFORMANCE, SECURITY, AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY
In this section, we will discuss the fundamental design principles along with rules of thumb for
building massively distributed computing systems. Coverage includes scalability, availability, pro￾gramming models, and security issues in clusters, grids, P2P networks, and Internet clouds.
Table 1.8 Grid Standards and Toolkits for Scientific and Engineering Applications [6]
Standards Service Functionalities
Key Features and Security
Infrastructure
OGSA Standard Open Grid Services Architecture; offers
common grid service standards for
general public use
Supports a heterogeneous distributed
environment, bridging CAs, multiple
trusted intermediaries, dynamic policies,
multiple security mechanisms, etc.
Globus Toolkits Resource allocation, Globus security
infrastructure (GSI), and generic
security service API
Sign-in multisite authentication with
PKI, Kerberos, SSL, Proxy, delegation,
and GSS API for message integrity and
confidentiality
IBM Grid Toolbox AIX and Linux grids built on top of
Globus Toolkit, autonomic computing,
replica services
Uses simple CA, grants access, grid
service (ReGS), supports grid
application for Java (GAF4J), GridMap
in IntraGrid for security update
44 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
1.5.1 Performance Metrics and Scalability Analysis
Performance metrics are needed to measure various distributed systems. In this section, we will dis￾cuss various dimensions of scalability and performance laws. Then we will examine system scalabil￾ity against OS images and the limiting factors encountered.
1.5.1.1 Performance Metrics
We discussed CPU speed in MIPS and network bandwidth in Mbps in Section 1.3.1 to estimate pro￾cessor and network performance. In a distributed system, performance is attributed to a large number
of factors. System throughput is often measured in MIPS, Tflops (tera floating-point operations per
second), or TPS (transactions per second). Other measures include job response time and network
latency. An interconnection network that has low latency and high bandwidth is preferred. System
overhead is often attributed to OS boot time, compile time, I/O data rate, and the runtime support sys￾tem used. Other performance-related metrics include the QoS for Internet and web services; system
availability and dependability; and security resilience for system defense against network attacks.
1.5.1.2 Dimensions of Scalability
Users want to have a distributed system that can achieve scalable performance. Any resource upgrade in
a system should be backward compatible with existing hardware and software resources. Overdesign
may not be cost-effective. System scaling can increase or decrease resources depending on many practi￾cal factors. The following dimensions of scalability are characterized in parallel and distributed systems:
• Size scalability This refers to achieving higher performance or more functionality by increasing
the machine size. The word “size” refers to adding processors, cache, memory, storage, or I/O
channels. The most obvious way to determine size scalability is to simply count the number of
processors installed. Not all parallel computer or distributed architectures are equally size￾scalable. For example, the IBM S2 was scaled up to 512 processors in 1997. But in 2008, the
IBM BlueGene/L system scaled up to 65,000 processors.
• Software scalability This refers to upgrades in the OS or compilers, adding mathematical and
engineering libraries, porting new application software, and installing more user-friendly
programming environments. Some software upgrades may not work with large system
configurations. Testing and fine-tuning of new software on larger systems is a nontrivial job.
• Application scalability This refers to matching problem size scalability with machine size
scalability. Problem size affects the size of the data set or the workload increase. Instead of increasing
machine size, users can enlarge the problem size to enhance system efficiency or cost-effectiveness.
• Technology scalability This refers to a system that can adapt to changes in building tech￾nologies, such as the component and networking technologies discussed in Section 3.1. When
scaling a system design with new technology one must consider three aspects: time, space, and
heterogeneity. (1) Time refers to generation scalability. When changing to new-generation pro￾cessors, one must consider the impact to the motherboard, power supply, packaging and cooling,
and so forth. Based on past experience, most systems upgrade their commodity processors every
three to five years. (2) Space is related to packaging and energy concerns. Technology scalabil￾ity demands harmony and portability among suppliers. (3) Heterogeneity refers to the use of
hardware components or software packages from different vendors. Heterogeneity may limit the
scalability.
1.5 Performance, Security, and Energy Efficiency 45
1.5.1.3 Scalability versus OS Image Count
In Figure 1.23, scalable performance is estimated against the multiplicity of OS images in distribu￾ted systems deployed up to 2010. Scalable performance implies that the system can achieve higher
speed by adding more processors or servers, enlarging the physical node’s memory size, extending
the disk capacity, or adding more I/O channels. The OS image is counted by the number of inde￾pendent OS images observed in a cluster, grid, P2P network, or the cloud. SMP and NUMA are
included in the comparison. An SMP (symmetric multiprocessor) server has a single system image,
which could be a single node in a large cluster. By 2010 standards, the largest shared-memory
SMP node was limited to a few hundred processors. The scalability of SMP systems is constrained
primarily by packaging and the system interconnect used.
NUMA (nonuniform memory access) machines are often made out of SMP nodes with distribu￾ted, shared memory. A NUMA machine can run with multiple operating systems, and can scale to
a few thousand processors communicating with the MPI library. For example, a NUMA machine
may have 2,048 processors running 32 SMP operating systems, resulting in 32 OS images in the
2,048-processor NUMA system. The cluster nodes can be either SMP servers or high-end machines
that are loosely coupled together. Therefore, clusters have much higher scalability than NUMA
machines. The number of OS images in a cluster is based on the cluster nodes concurrently in use.
The cloud could be a virtualized cluster. As of 2010, the largest cloud was able to scale up to a
few thousand VMs.
Keeping in mind that many cluster nodes are SMP or multicore servers, the total number of pro￾cessors or cores in a cluster system is one or two orders of magnitude greater than the number of
OS images running in the cluster. The grid node could be a server cluster, or a mainframe, or a
supercomputer, or an MPP. Therefore, the number of OS images in a large grid structure could be
hundreds or thousands fewer than the total number of processors in the grid. A P2P network can
easily scale to millions of independent peer nodes, essentially desktop machines. P2P performance
107
106
105
104
103
102
102 103 104 105 106 107
10
1
1 10
SMP
NUMA
Cloud
Cluster
Scalability
(No. of
processors
or cores in a
system)
P2P
Grid
Multiplicity of OS images in a system
FIGURE 1.23
System scalability versus multiplicity of OS images based on 2010 technology.
46 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies
depends on the QoS in a public network. Low-speed P2P networks, Internet clouds, and computer
clusters should be evaluated at the same networking level.
1.5.1.4 Amdahl’s Law
Consider the execution of a given program on a uniprocessor workstation with a total execution
time of T minutes. Now, let’s say the program has been parallelized or partitioned for parallel
execution on a cluster of many processing nodes. Assume that a fraction α of the code must be exe￾cuted sequentially, called the sequential bottleneck. Therefore, (1 − α) of the code can be compiled
for parallel execution by n processors. The total execution time of the program is calculated by
α T + (1 − α)T/n, where the first term is the sequential execution time on a single processor and the
second term is the parallel execution time on n processing nodes.
All system or communication overhead is ignored here. The I/O time or exception handling time
is also not included in the following speedup analysis. Amdahl’s Law states that the speedup factor
of using the n-processor system over the use of a single processor is expressed by:
Speedup =S= T/½αT +ð1− αÞT/n =1/½α +ð1 −αÞ/n (1.1)
The maximum speedup of n is achieved only if the sequential bottleneck α is reduced to zero or
the code is fully parallelizable with α = 0. As the cluster becomes sufficiently large, that is, n →
∞, S approaches 1/α, an upper bound on the speedup S. Surprisingly, this upper bound is indepen￾dent of the cluster size n. The sequential bottleneck is the portion of the code that cannot be paral￾lelized. For example, the maximum speedup achieved is 4, if α = 0.25 or 1 − α = 0.75, even if one
uses hundreds of processors. Amdahl’s law teaches us that we should make the sequential bottle￾neck as small as possible. Increasing the cluster size alone may not result in a good speedup in
this case.
1.5.1.5 Problem with Fixed Workload
In Amdahl’s law, we have assumed the same amount of workload for both sequential and parallel
execution of the program with a fixed problem size or data set. This was called fixed-workload
speedup by Hwang and Xu [14]. To execute a fixed workload on n processors, parallel processing
may lead to a system efficiency defined as follows:
E =S/n =1/½αn +1 −α (1.2)
Very often the system efficiency is rather low, especially when the cluster size is very large.
To execute the aforementioned program on a cluster with n = 256 nodes, extremely low efficiency
E = 1/[0.25 × 256 + 0.75] = 1.5% is observed. This is because only a few processors (say, 4) are
kept busy, while the majority of the nodes are left idling.
1.5.1.6 Gustafson’s Law
To achieve higher efficiency when using a large cluster, we must consider scaling the problem size
to match the cluster capability. This leads to the following speedup law proposed by John Gustafson
(1988), referred as scaled-workload speedup in [14]. Let W be the workload in a given program.
When using an n-processor system, the user scales the workload to W′ = αW + (1 − α)nW. Note that
only the parallelizable portion of the workload is scaled n times in the second term. This scaled
1.5 Performance, Security, and Energy Efficiency 47
workload W′ is essentially the sequential execution time on a single processor. The parallel
execution time of a scaled workload W′ on n processors is defined by a scaled-workload speedup
as follows:
S′ = W′/W =½αW + ð1− αÞnW /W = α+ ð1 −αÞn (1.3)
This speedup is known as Gustafson’s law. By fixing the parallel execution time at level W, the
following efficiency expression is obtained:
E′ =S′/n= α/n+ð1− αÞ (1.4)
For the preceding program with a scaled workload, we can improve the efficiency of using a
256-node cluster to E′ = 0.25/256 + 0.75 = 0.751. One should apply Amdahl’s law and Gustafson’s
law under different workload conditions. For a fixed workload, users should apply Amdahl’s law.
To solve scaled problems, users should apply Gustafson’s law.
1.5.2 Fault Tolerance and System Availability
In addition to performance, system availability and application flexibility are two other important
design goals in a distributed computing system.
1.5.2.1 System Availability
HA (high availability) is desired in all clusters, grids, P2P networks, and cloud systems. A system is
highly available if it has a long mean time to failure (MTTF) and a short mean time to repair
(MTTR). System availability is formally defined as follows:
System Availability = MTTF/ðMTTF + MTTRÞ (1.5)
System availability is attributed to many factors. All hardware, software, and network compo￾nents may fail. Any failure that will pull down the operation of the entire system is called a single
point of failure. The rule of thumb is to design a dependable computing system with no single
point of failure. Adding hardware redundancy, increasing component reliability, and designing for
testability will help to enhance system availability and dependability. In Figure 1.24, the effects on
system availability are estimated by scaling the system size in terms of the number of processor
cores in the system.
In general, as a distributed system increases in size, availability decreases due to a higher chance
of failure and a difficulty in isolating the failures. Both SMP and MPP are very vulnerable with
centralized resources under one OS. NUMA machines have improved in availability due to the use
of multiple OSes. Most clusters are designed to have HA with failover capability. Meanwhile, pri￾vate clouds are created out of virtualized data centers; hence, a cloud has an estimated availability
similar to that of the hosting cluster. A grid is visualized as a hierarchical cluster of clusters. Grids
have higher availability due to the isolation of faults. Therefore, clusters, clouds, and grids have
decreasing availability as the system increases in size. A P2P file-sharing network has the highest
aggregation of client machines. However, it operates independently with low availability, and even
many peer nodes depart or fail simultaneously.
48 CHAPTER 1 Distributed System Models and Enabling Technologies